What is artificial intelligence (AI)?
By
Ed BurnsNicole Laskowski, Senior News DirectorLinda Tucci, Industry Editor -- CIO/IT Strategy
Artificial intelligence is the simulation of human intelligence processes by machines, especially computer systems. Specific applications of AI include expert systems, natural language processing, speech recognition and machine vision.

How does AI work?
As the hype around AI has accelerated, vendors have been scrambling to promote how their products and services use AI. Often what they refer to as AI is simply one component of AI, such as machine learning. AI requires a foundation of specialized hardware and software for writing and training machine learning algorithms. No one programming language is synonymous with AI, but a few, including Python, R and Java, are popular.

In general, AI systems work by ingesting large amounts of labeled training data, analyzing the data for correlations and patterns, and using these patterns to make predictions about future states. In this way, a chatbot that is fed examples of text chats can learn to produce lifelike exchanges with people, or an image recognition tool can learn to identify and describe objects in images by reviewing millions of examples.

AI programming focuses on three cognitive skills: learning, reasoning and self-correction.

Learning processes. This aspect of AI programming focuses on acquiring data and creating rules for how to turn the data into actionable information. The rules, which are called algorithms, provide computing devices with step-by-step instructions for how to complete a specific task.

THIS ARTICLE IS PART OF

A guide to artificial intelligence in the enterprise
Which also includes:
4 main types of artificial intelligence: Explained
7 key benefits of AI for business
10 steps to achieve AI implementation in your business
DOWNLOAD
1
Download this entire guide for FREE now!

Reasoning processes. This aspect of AI programming focuses on choosing the right algorithm to reach a desired outcome.

Self-correction processes. This aspect of AI programming is designed to continually fine-tune algorithms and ensure they provide the most accurate results possible.


Why is artificial intelligence important?
AI is important because it can give enterprises insights into their operations that they may not have been aware of previously and because, in some cases, AI can perform tasks better than humans. Particularly when it comes to repetitive, detail-oriented tasks like analyzing large numbers of legal documents to ensure relevant fields are filled in properly, AI tools often complete jobs quickly and with relatively few errors.

This has helped fuel an explosion in efficiency and opened the door to entirely new business opportunities for some larger enterprises. Prior to the current wave of AI, it would have been hard to imagine using computer software to connect riders to taxis, but today Uber has become one of the largest companies in the world by doing just that. It utilizes sophisticated machine learning algorithms to predict when people are likely to need rides in certain areas, which helps proactively get drivers on the road before they're needed. As another example, Google has become one of the largest players for a range of online services by using machine learning to understand how people use their services and then improving them. In 2017, the company's CEO, Sundar Pichai, pronounced that Google would operate as an "AI first" company.

Today's largest and most successful enterprises have used AI to improve their operations and gain advantage on their competitors.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of artificial intelligence?
Artificial neural networks and deep learning artificial intelligence technologies are quickly evolving, primarily because AI processes large amounts of data much faster and makes predictions more accurately than humanly possible.

While the huge volume of data being created on a daily basis would bury a human researcher, AI applications that use machine learning can take that data and quickly turn it into actionable information. As of this writing, the primary disadvantage of using AI is that it is expensive to process the large amounts of data that AI programming requires.

Advantages

Good at detail-oriented jobs;
Reduced time for data-heavy tasks;
Delivers consistent results; and
AI-powered virtual agents are always available.
Disadvantages

Expensive;
Requires deep technical expertise;
Limited supply of qualified workers to build AI tools;
Only knows what it's been shown; and
Lack of ability to generalize from one task to another.
Strong AI vs. weak AI
AI can be categorized as either weak or strong.

Weak AI, also known as narrow AI, is an AI system that is designed and trained to complete a specific task. Industrial robots and virtual personal assistants, such as Apple's Siri, use weak AI.
Strong AI, also known as artificial general intelligence (AGI), describes programming that can replicate the cognitive abilities of the human brain. When presented with an unfamiliar task, a strong AI system can use fuzzy logic to apply knowledge from one domain to another and find a solution autonomously. In theory, a strong AI program should be able to pass both a Turing Test and the Chinese room test.
What are the 4 types of artificial intelligence?
Arend Hintze, an assistant professor of integrative biology and computer science and engineering at Michigan State University, explained in a 2016 article that AI can be categorized into four types, beginning with the task-specific intelligent systems in wide use today and progressing to sentient systems, which do not yet exist. The categories are as follows:

Type 1: Reactive machines. These AI systems have no memory and are task specific. An example is Deep Blue, the IBM chess program that beat Garry Kasparov in the 1990s. Deep Blue can identify pieces on the chessboard and make predictions, but because it has no memory, it cannot use past experiences to inform future ones.
Type 2: Limited memory. These AI systems have memory, so they can use past experiences to inform future decisions. Some of the decision-making functions in self-driving cars are designed this way.
Type 3: Theory of mind. Theory of mind is a psychology term. When applied to AI, it means that the system would have the social intelligence to understand emotions. This type of AI will be able to infer human intentions and predict behavior, a necessary skill for AI systems to become integral members of human teams.
Type 4: Self-awareness. In this category, AI systems have a sense of self, which gives them consciousness. Machines with self-awareness understand their own current state. This type of AI does not yet exist.
The evolution of artificial intelligence
What are examples of AI technology and how is it used today?
AI is incorporated into a variety of different types of technology. Here are six examples:

Automation. When paired with AI technologies, automation tools can expand the volume and types of tasks performed. An example is robotic process automation (RPA), a type of software that automates repetitive, rules-based data processing tasks traditionally done by humans. When combined with machine learning and emerging AI tools, RPA can automate bigger portions of enterprise jobs, enabling RPA's tactical bots to pass along intelligence from AI and respond to process changes.
Machine learning. This is the science of getting a computer to act without programming. Deep learning is a subset of machine learning that, in very simple terms, can be thought of as the automation of predictive analytics. There are three types of machine learning algorithms:
Supervised learning. Data sets are labeled so that patterns can be detected and used to label new data sets.
Unsupervised learning. Data sets aren't labeled and are sorted according to similarities or differences.
Reinforcement learning. Data sets aren't labeled but, after performing an action or several actions, the AI system is given feedback.
Machine vision. This technology gives a machine the ability to see. Machine vision captures and analyzes visual information using a camera, analog-to-digital conversion and digital signal processing. It is often compared to human eyesight, but machine vision isn't bound by biology and can be programmed to see through walls, for example. It is used in a range of applications from signature identification to medical image analysis. Computer vision, which is focused on machine-based image processing, is often conflated with machine vision.
Natural language processing (NLP). This is the processing of human language by a computer program. One of the older and best-known examples of NLP is spam detection, which looks at the subject line and text of an email and decides if it's junk. Current approaches to NLP are based on machine learning. NLP tasks include text translation, sentiment analysis and speech recognition.
Robotics. This field of engineering focuses on the design and manufacturing of robots. Robots are often used to perform tasks that are difficult for humans to perform or perform consistently. For example, robots are used in assembly lines for car production or by NASA to move large objects in space. Researchers are also using machine learning to build robots that can interact in social settings.
Self-driving cars. Autonomous vehicles use a combination of computer vision, image recognition and deep learning to build automated skill at piloting a vehicle while staying in a given lane and avoiding unexpected obstructions, such as pedestrians.
A list of various AI components
AI is not just one technology.
What are the applications of AI?
Artificial intelligence has made its way into a wide variety of markets. Here are nine examples.

AI in healthcare. The biggest bets are on improving patient outcomes and reducing costs. Companies are applying machine learning to make better and faster diagnoses than humans. One of the best-known healthcare technologies is IBM Watson. It understands natural language and can respond to questions asked of it. The system mines patient data and other available data sources to form a hypothesis, which it then presents with a confidence scoring schema. Other AI applications include using online virtual health assistants and chatbots to help patients and healthcare customers find medical information, schedule appointments, understand the billing process and complete other administrative processes. An array of AI technologies is also being used to predict, fight and understand pandemics such as COVID-19.

AI in business. Machine learning algorithms are being integrated into analytics and customer relationship management (CRM) platforms to uncover information on how to better serve customers. Chatbots have been incorporated into websites to provide immediate service to customers. Automation of job positions has also become a talking point among academics and IT analysts.

AI in education. AI can automate grading, giving educators more time. It can assess students and adapt to their needs, helping them work at their own pace. AI tutors can provide additional support to students, ensuring they stay on track. And it could change where and how students learn, perhaps even replacing some teachers.

AI in finance. AI in personal finance applications, such as Intuit Mint or TurboTax, is disrupting financial institutions. Applications such as these collect personal data and provide financial advice. Other programs, such as IBM Watson, have been applied to the process of buying a home. Today, artificial intelligence software performs much of the trading on Wall Street.


AI in law. The discovery process -- sifting through documents -- in law is often overwhelming for humans. Using AI to help automate the legal industry's labor-intensive processes is saving time and improving client service. Law firms are using machine learning to describe data and predict outcomes, computer vision to classify and extract information from documents and natural language processing to interpret requests for information.

AI in manufacturing. Manufacturing has been at the forefront of incorporating robots into the workflow. For example, the industrial robots that were at one time programmed to perform single tasks and separated from human workers, increasingly function as cobots: Smaller, multitasking robots that collaborate with humans and take on responsibility for more parts of the job in warehouses, factory floors and other workspaces.

AI in banking. Banks are successfully employing chatbots to make their customers aware of services and offerings and to handle transactions that don't require human intervention. AI virtual assistants are being used to improve and cut the costs of compliance with banking regulations. Banking organizations are also using AI to improve their decision-making for loans, and to set credit limits and identify investment opportunities.

AI in transportation. In addition to AI's fundamental role in operating autonomous vehicles, AI technologies are used in transportation to manage traffic, predict flight delays, and make ocean shipping safer and more efficient.

Security. AI and machine learning are at the top of the buzzword list security vendors use today to differentiate their offerings. Those terms also represent truly viable technologies. Organizations use machine learning in security information and event management (SIEM) software and related areas to detect anomalies and identify suspicious activities that indicate threats. By analyzing data and using logic to identify similarities to known malicious code, AI can provide alerts to new and emerging attacks much sooner than human employees and previous technology iterations. The maturing technology is playing a big role in helping organizations fight off cyber attacks.

Augmented intelligence vs. artificial intelligence
Some industry experts believe the term artificial intelligence is too closely linked to popular culture, and this has caused the general public to have improbable expectations about how AI will change the workplace and life in general.

Augmented intelligence. Some researchers and marketers hope the label augmented intelligence, which has a more neutral connotation, will help people understand that most implementations of AI will be weak and simply improve products and services. Examples include automatically surfacing important information in business intelligence reports or highlighting important information in legal filings.
Artificial intelligence. True AI, or artificial general intelligence, is closely associated with the concept of the technological singularity -- a future ruled by an artificial superintelligence that far surpasses the human brain's ability to understand it or how it is shaping our reality. This remains within the realm of science fiction, though some developers are working on the problem. Many believe that technologies such as quantum computing could play an important role in making AGI a reality and that we should reserve the use of the term AI for this kind of general intelligence.
Ethical use of artificial intelligence
While AI tools present a range of new functionality for businesses, the use of artificial intelligence also raises ethical questions because, for better or worse, an AI system will reinforce what it has already learned.

This can be problematic because machine learning algorithms, which underpin many of the most advanced AI tools, are only as smart as the data they are given in training. Because a human being selects what data is used to train an AI program, the potential for machine learning bias is inherent and must be monitored closely.

Anyone looking to use machine learning as part of real-world, in-production systems needs to factor ethics into their AI training processes and strive to avoid bias. This is especially true when using AI algorithms that are inherently unexplainable in deep learning and generative adversarial network (GAN) applications.

Explainability is a potential stumbling block to using AI in industries that operate under strict regulatory compliance requirements. For example, financial institutions in the United States operate under regulations that require them to explain their credit-issuing decisions. When a decision to refuse credit is made by AI programming, however, it can be difficult to explain how the decision was arrived at because the AI tools used to make such decisions operate by teasing out subtle correlations between thousands of variables. When the decision-making process cannot be explained, the program may be referred to as black box AI.

Components of responsible AI use.
These components make up responsible AI use.
Despite potential risks, there are currently few regulations governing the use of AI tools, and where laws do exist, they typically pertain to AI indirectly. For example, as previously mentioned, United States Fair Lending regulations require financial institutions to explain credit decisions to potential customers. This limits the extent to which lenders can use deep learning algorithms, which by their nature are opaque and lack explainability.

The European Union's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) puts strict limits on how enterprises can use consumer data, which impedes the training and functionality of many consumer-facing AI applications.

In October 2016, the National Science and Technology Council issued a report examining the potential role governmental regulation might play in AI development, but it did not recommend specific legislation be considered.

Crafting laws to regulate AI will not be easy, in part because AI comprises a variety of technologies that companies use for different ends, and partly because regulations can come at the cost of AI progress and development. The rapid evolution of AI technologies is another obstacle to forming meaningful regulation of AI. Technology breakthroughs and novel applications can make existing laws instantly obsolete. For example, existing laws regulating the privacy of conversations and recorded conversations do not cover the challenge posed by voice assistants like Amazon's Alexa and Apple's Siri that gather but do not distribute conversation -- except to the companies' technology teams which use it to improve machine learning algorithms. And, of course, the laws that governments do manage to craft to regulate AI don't stop criminals from using the technology with malicious intent.

Cognitive computing and AI
The terms AI and cognitive computing are sometimes used interchangeably, but, generally speaking, the label AI is used in reference to machines that replace human intelligence by simulating how we sense, learn, process and react to information in the environment.

The label cognitive computing is used in reference to products and services that mimic and augment human thought processes.

What is the history of AI?
The concept of inanimate objects endowed with intelligence has been around since ancient times. The Greek god Hephaestus was depicted in myths as forging robot-like servants out of gold. Engineers in ancient Egypt built statues of gods animated by priests. Throughout the centuries, thinkers from Aristotle to the 13th century Spanish theologian Ramon Llull to René Descartes and Thomas Bayes used the tools and logic of their times to describe human thought processes as symbols, laying the foundation for AI concepts such as general knowledge representation.

AI winters
Support for the modern field of AI, 1956 to the present.
The late 19th and first half of the 20th centuries brought forth the foundational work that would give rise to the modern computer. In 1836, Cambridge University mathematician Charles Babbage and Augusta Ada Byron, Countess of Lovelace, invented the first design for a programmable machine.

1940s. Princeton mathematician John Von Neumann conceived the architecture for the stored-program computer -- the idea that a computer's program and the data it processes can be kept in the computer's memory. And Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts laid the foundation for neural networks.

1950s. With the advent of modern computers, scientists could test their ideas about machine intelligence. One method for determining whether a computer has intelligence was devised by the British mathematician and World War II code-breaker Alan Turing. The Turing Test focused on a computer's ability to fool interrogators into believing its responses to their questions were made by a human being.

1956. The modern field of artificial intelligence is widely cited as starting this year during a summer conference at Dartmouth College. Sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the conference was attended by 10 luminaries in the field, including AI pioneers Marvin Minsky, Oliver Selfridge and John McCarthy, who is credited with coining the term artificial intelligence. Also in attendance were Allen Newell, a computer scientist, and Herbert A. Simon, an economist, political scientist and cognitive psychologist, who presented their groundbreaking Logic Theorist, a computer program capable of proving certain mathematical theorems and referred to as the first AI program.

1950s and 1960s. In the wake of the Dartmouth College conference, leaders in the fledgling field of AI predicted that a man-made intelligence equivalent to the human brain was around the corner, attracting major government and industry support. Indeed, nearly 20 years of well-funded basic research generated significant advances in AI: For example, in the late 1950s, Newell and Simon published the General Problem Solver (GPS) algorithm, which fell short of solving complex problems but laid the foundations for developing more sophisticated cognitive architectures; McCarthy developed Lisp, a language for AI programming that is still used today. In the mid-1960s MIT Professor Joseph Weizenbaum developed ELIZA, an early natural language processing program that laid the foundation for today's chatbots.

1970s and 1980s. But the achievement of artificial general intelligence proved elusive, not imminent, hampered by limitations in computer processing and memory and by the complexity of the problem. Government and corporations backed away from their support of AI research, leading to a fallow period lasting from 1974 to 1980 and known as the first "AI Winter." In the 1980s, research on deep learning techniques and industry's adoption of Edward Feigenbaum's expert systems sparked a new wave of AI enthusiasm, only to be followed by another collapse of government funding and industry support. The second AI winter lasted until the mid-1990s.

1990s through today. Increases in computational power and an explosion of data sparked an AI renaissance in the late 1990s that has continued to present times. The latest focus on AI has given rise to breakthroughs in natural language processing, computer vision, robotics, machine learning, deep learning and more. Moreover, AI is becoming ever more tangible, powering cars, diagnosing disease and cementing its role in popular culture. In 1997, IBM's Deep Blue defeated Russian chess grandmaster Garry Kasparov, becoming the first computer program to beat a world chess champion. Fourteen years later, IBM's Watson captivated the public when it defeated two former champions on the game show Jeopardy!. More recently, the historic defeat of 18-time World Go champion Lee Sedol by Google DeepMind's AlphaGo stunned the Go community and marked a major milestone in the development of intelligent machines.

AI as a service
Because hardware, software and staffing costs for AI can be expensive, many vendors are including AI components in their standard offerings or providing access to artificial intelligence as a service (AIaaS) platforms. AIaaS allows individuals and companies to experiment with AI for various business purposes and sample multiple platforms before making a commitment.

Popular AI cloud offerings include the following:

Amazon AI
IBM Watson Assistant
Microsoft Cognitive Services
Google AI
This was last updated in January 2023
Continue Reading About What is artificial intelligence (AI)?
What is digital transformation?
Pros and cons of AI-generated content
Four AI trends to look for in 2023
AI in IT infrastructure transforms how work gets done
"AI" redirects here. For other uses, see AI (disambiguation), Artificial intelligence (disambiguation), and Intelligent agent.
Part of a series on
Artificial intelligence
Anatomy-1751201 1280.png
Major goals
Approaches
Philosophy
History
Technology
Glossary
vte
Artificial intelligence (AI) is intelligence—perceiving, synthesizing, and inferring information—demonstrated by machines, as opposed to intelligence displayed by non-human animals and humans. Example tasks in which this is done include speech recognition, computer vision, translation between (natural) languages, as well as other mappings of inputs.

AI applications include advanced web search engines (e.g., Google Search), recommendation systems (used by YouTube, Amazon and Netflix), understanding human speech (such as Siri and Alexa), self-driving cars (e.g., Waymo), automated decision-making and competing at the highest level in strategic game systems (such as chess and Go).[1] As machines become increasingly capable, tasks considered to require "intelligence" are often removed from the definition of AI, a phenomenon known as the AI effect.[2] For instance, optical character recognition is frequently excluded from things considered to be AI,[3] having become a routine technology.[4]

Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956, and in the years since has experienced several waves of optimism,[5][6] followed by disappointment and the loss of funding (known as an "AI winter"),[7][8] followed by new approaches, success and renewed funding.[6][9] AI research has tried and discarded many different approaches since its founding, including simulating the brain, modeling human problem solving, formal logic, large databases of knowledge and imitating animal behavior. In the first decades of the 21st century, highly mathematical-statistical machine learning has dominated the field, and this technique has proved highly successful, helping to solve many challenging problems throughout industry and academia.[9][10]

The various sub-fields of AI research are centered around particular goals and the use of particular tools. The traditional goals of AI research include reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, learning, natural language processing, perception, and the ability to move and manipulate objects.[a] General intelligence (the ability to solve an arbitrary problem) is among the field's long-term goals.[11] To solve these problems, AI researchers have adapted and integrated a wide range of problem-solving techniques – including search and mathematical optimization, formal logic, artificial neural networks, and methods based on statistics, probability and economics. AI also draws upon computer science, psychology, linguistics, philosophy, and many other fields.

The field was founded on the assumption that human intelligence "can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it".[b] This raised philosophical arguments about the mind and the ethical consequences of creating artificial beings endowed with human-like intelligence; these issues have previously been explored by myth, fiction and philosophy since antiquity.[13] Computer scientists and philosophers have since suggested that AI may become an existential risk to humanity if its rational capacities are not steered towards beneficial goals.[c]

History
Main articles: History of artificial intelligence and Timeline of artificial intelligence

Silver didrachma from Crete depicting Talos, an ancient mythical automaton with artificial intelligence
Artificial beings with intelligence appeared as storytelling devices in antiquity,[14] and have been common in fiction, as in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein or Karel Čapek's R.U.R.[15] These characters and their fates raised many of the same issues now discussed in the ethics of artificial intelligence.[16]

The study of mechanical or "formal" reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of mathematical logic led directly to Alan Turing's theory of computation, which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as "0" and "1", could simulate any conceivable act of mathematical deduction. This insight that digital computers can simulate any process of formal reasoning is known as the Church–Turing thesis.[17] This, along with concurrent discoveries in neurobiology, information theory and cybernetics, led researchers to consider the possibility of building an electronic brain.[18] The first work that is now generally recognized as AI was McCullouch and Pitts' 1943 formal design for Turing-complete "artificial neurons".[19]

By the 1950s, two visions for how to achieve machine intelligence emerged. One vision, known as Symbolic AI or GOFAI, was to use computers to create a symbolic representation of the world and systems that could reason about the world. Proponents included Allen Newell, Herbert A. Simon, and Marvin Minsky. Closely associated with this approach was the "heuristic search" approach, which likened intelligence to a problem of exploring a space of possibilities for answers. The second vision, known as the connectionist approach, sought to achieve intelligence through learning. Proponents of this approach, most prominently Frank Rosenblatt, sought to connect Perceptron in ways inspired by connections of neurons.[20] James Manyika and others have compared the two approaches to the mind (Symbolic AI) and the brain (connectionist). Manyika argues that symbolic approaches dominated the push for artificial intelligence in this period, due in part to its connection to intellectual traditions of Descartes, Boole, Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell, and others. Connectionist approaches based on cybernetics or artificial neural networks were pushed to the background but have gained new prominence in recent decades.[21]

The field of AI research was born at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956.[d][24] The attendees became the founders and leaders of AI research.[e] They and their students produced programs that the press described as "astonishing":[f] computers were learning checkers strategies, solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems and speaking English.[g][26] By the middle of the 1960s, research in the U.S. was heavily funded by the Department of Defense[27] and laboratories had been established around the world.[28]

Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that symbolic approaches would eventually succeed in creating a machine with artificial general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field.[29] Herbert Simon predicted, "machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do".[30] Marvin Minsky agreed, writing, "within a generation ... the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will substantially be solved".[31] They had failed to recognize the difficulty of some of the remaining tasks. Progress slowed and in 1974, in response to the criticism of Sir James Lighthill[32] and ongoing pressure from the US Congress to fund more productive projects, both the U.S. and British governments cut off exploratory research in AI. The next few years would later be called an "AI winter", a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult.[7]

In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems,[33] a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japan's fifth generation computer project inspired the U.S. and British governments to restore funding for academic research.[6] However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting winter began.[8]

Many researchers began to doubt that the symbolic approach would be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception, robotics, learning and pattern recognition. A number of researchers began to look into "sub-symbolic" approaches to specific AI problems.[34] Robotics researchers, such as Rodney Brooks, rejected symbolic AI and focused on the basic engineering problems that would allow robots to move, survive, and learn their environment.[h] Interest in neural networks and "connectionism" was revived by Geoffrey Hinton, David Rumelhart and others in the middle of the 1980s.[39] Soft computing tools were developed in the 1980s, such as neural networks, fuzzy systems, Grey system theory, evolutionary computation and many tools drawn from statistics or mathematical optimization.

AI gradually restored its reputation in the late 1990s and early 21st century by finding specific solutions to specific problems. The narrow focus allowed researchers to produce verifiable results, exploit more mathematical methods, and collaborate with other fields (such as statistics, economics and mathematics).[40] By 2000, solutions developed by AI researchers were being widely used, although in the 1990s they were rarely described as "artificial intelligence".[10]

Faster computers, algorithmic improvements, and access to large amounts of data enabled advances in machine learning and perception; data-hungry deep learning methods started to dominate accuracy benchmarks around 2012.[41] According to Bloomberg's Jack Clark, 2015 was a landmark year for artificial intelligence, with the number of software projects that use AI within Google increased from a "sporadic usage" in 2012 to more than 2,700 projects.[i] He attributes this to an increase in affordable neural networks, due to a rise in cloud computing infrastructure and to an increase in research tools and datasets.[9] In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported they had "incorporated AI in some offerings or processes".[42] The amount of research into AI (measured by total publications) increased by 50% in the years 2015–2019.[43]

Numerous academic researchers became concerned that AI was no longer pursuing the original goal of creating versatile, fully intelligent machines. Much of current research involves statistical AI, which is overwhelmingly used to solve specific problems, even highly successful techniques such as deep learning. This concern has led to the subfield of artificial general intelligence (or "AGI"), which had several well-funded institutions by the 2010s.[11]

Goals
The general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been broken down into sub-problems. These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention.[a]

Reasoning, problem-solving
Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions.[44] By the late 1980s and 1990s, AI research had developed methods for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics.[45]

Many of these algorithms proved to be insufficient for solving large reasoning problems because they experienced a "combinatorial explosion": they became exponentially slower as the problems grew larger.[46] Even humans rarely use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research could model. They solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments.[47]

Knowledge representation
Main articles: Knowledge representation, Commonsense knowledge, Description logic, and Ontology

An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts.
Knowledge representation and knowledge engineering[48] allow AI programs to answer questions intelligently and make deductions about real-world facts.

A representation of "what exists" is an ontology: the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties formally described so that software agents can interpret them.[49] The most general ontologies are called upper ontologies, which attempt to provide a foundation for all other knowledge and act as mediators between domain ontologies that cover specific knowledge about a particular knowledge domain (field of interest or area of concern). A truly intelligent program would also need access to commonsense knowledge; the set of facts that an average person knows. The semantics of an ontology is typically represented in description logic, such as the Web Ontology Language.[50]

AI research has developed tools to represent specific domains, such as objects, properties, categories and relations between objects;[50] situations, events, states and time;[51] causes and effects;[52] knowledge about knowledge (what we know about what other people know);.[53] default reasoning (things that humans assume are true until they are told differently and will remain true even when other facts are changing); [54] as well as other domains. Among the most difficult problems in AI are: the breadth of commonsense knowledge (the number of atomic facts that the average person knows is enormous);[55] and the sub-symbolic form of most commonsense knowledge (much of what people know is not represented as "facts" or "statements" that they could express verbally).[47]

Formal knowledge representations are used in content-based indexing and retrieval,[56] scene interpretation,[57] clinical decision support,[58] knowledge discovery (mining "interesting" and actionable inferences from large databases),[59] and other areas.[60]

Learning
Main article: Machine learning
Machine learning (ML), a fundamental concept of AI research since the field's inception,[j] is the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience.[k]

Unsupervised learning finds patterns in a stream of input. Supervised learning requires a human to label the input data first, and comes in two main varieties: classification and numerical regression. Classification is used to determine what category something belongs in – the program sees a number of examples of things from several categories and will learn to classify new inputs. Regression is the attempt to produce a function that describes the relationship between inputs and outputs and predicts how the outputs should change as the inputs change. Both classifiers and regression learners can be viewed as "function approximators" trying to learn an unknown (possibly implicit) function; for example, a spam classifier can be viewed as learning a function that maps from the text of an email to one of two categories, "spam" or "not spam".[64] In reinforcement learning the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. The agent classifies its responses to form a strategy for operating in its problem space.[65] Transfer learning is when the knowledge gained from one problem is applied to a new problem.[66]

Computational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity, by sample complexity (how much data is required), or by other notions of optimization.[67]

Natural language processing
Main article: Natural language processing

A parse tree represents the syntactic structure of a sentence according to some formal grammar.
Natural language processing (NLP)[68] allows machines to read and understand human language. A sufficiently powerful natural language processing system would enable natural-language user interfaces and the acquisition of knowledge directly from human-written sources, such as newswire texts. Some straightforward applications of NLP include information retrieval, question answering and machine translation.[69]

Symbolic AI used formal syntax to translate the deep structure of sentences into logic. This failed to produce useful applications, due to the intractability of logic[46] and the breadth of commonsense knowledge.[55] Modern statistical techniques include co-occurrence frequencies (how often one word appears near another), "Keyword spotting" (searching for a particular word to retrieve information), transformer-based deep learning (which finds patterns in text), and others.[70] They have achieved acceptable accuracy at the page or paragraph level, and, by 2019, could generate coherent text.[71]

Perception
Main articles: Machine perception, Computer vision, and Speech recognition

Feature detection (pictured: edge detection) helps AI compose informative abstract structures out of raw data.
Machine perception[72] is the ability to use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, wireless signals, and active lidar, sonar, radar, and tactile sensors) to deduce aspects of the world. Applications include speech recognition,[73] facial recognition, and object recognition.[74] Computer vision is the ability to analyze visual input.[75]

Social intelligence
Main article: Affective computing

Kismet, a robot with rudimentary social skills[76]
Affective computing is an interdisciplinary umbrella that comprises systems that recognize, interpret, process or simulate human feeling, emotion and mood.[77] For example, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even to banter humorously; it makes them appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate human–computer interaction. However, this tends to give naïve users an unrealistic conception of how intelligent existing computer agents actually are.[78] Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal sentiment analysis), wherein AI classifies the affects displayed by a videotaped subject.[79]

General intelligence
Main article: Artificial general intelligence
A machine with general intelligence can solve a wide variety of problems with breadth and versatility similar to human intelligence. There are several competing ideas about how to develop artificial general intelligence. Hans Moravec and Marvin Minsky argue that work in different individual domains can be incorporated into an advanced multi-agent system or cognitive architecture with general intelligence.[80] Pedro Domingos hopes that there is a conceptually straightforward, but mathematically difficult, "master algorithm" that could lead to AGI.[81] Others believe that anthropomorphic features like an artificial brain[82] or simulated child development[l] will someday reach a critical point where general intelligence emerges.

Tools
Search and optimization
Main articles: Search algorithm, Mathematical optimization, and Evolutionary computation
AI can solve many problems by intelligently searching through many possible solutions.[83] Reasoning can be reduced to performing a search. For example, logical proof can be viewed as searching for a path that leads from premises to conclusions, where each step is the application of an inference rule.[84] Planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called means-ends analysis.[85] Robotics algorithms for moving limbs and grasping objects use local searches in configuration space.[86]

Simple exhaustive searches[87] are rarely sufficient for most real-world problems: the search space (the number of places to search) quickly grows to astronomical numbers. The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. The solution, for many problems, is to use "heuristics" or "rules of thumb" that prioritize choices in favor of those more likely to reach a goal and to do so in a shorter number of steps. In some search methodologies, heuristics can also serve to eliminate some choices unlikely to lead to a goal (called "pruning the search tree"). Heuristics supply the program with a "best guess" for the path on which the solution lies.[88] Heuristics limit the search for solutions into a smaller sample size.[89]


A particle swarm seeking the global minimum
A very different kind of search came to prominence in the 1990s, based on the mathematical theory of optimization. For many problems, it is possible to begin the search with some form of a guess and then refine the guess incrementally until no more refinements can be made. These algorithms can be visualized as blind hill climbing: we begin the search at a random point on the landscape, and then, by jumps or steps, we keep moving our guess uphill, until we reach the top. Other related optimization algorithms include random optimization, beam search and metaheuristics like simulated annealing.[90] Evolutionary computation uses a form of optimization search. For example, they may begin with a population of organisms (the guesses) and then allow them to mutate and recombine, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation (refining the guesses). Classic evolutionary algorithms include genetic algorithms, gene expression programming, and genetic programming.[91] Alternatively, distributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms. Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimization (inspired by bird flocking) and ant colony optimization (inspired by ant trails).[92]

Logic
Main articles: Logic programming and Automated reasoning
Logic[93] is used for knowledge representation and problem-solving, but it can be applied to other problems as well. For example, the satplan algorithm uses logic for planning[94] and inductive logic programming is a method for learning.[95]

Several different forms of logic are used in AI research. Propositional logic[96] involves truth functions such as "or" and "not". First-order logic[97] adds quantifiers and predicates and can express facts about objects, their properties, and their relations with each other. Fuzzy logic assigns a "degree of truth" (between 0 and 1) to vague statements such as "Alice is old" (or rich, or tall, or hungry), that are too linguistically imprecise to be completely true or false.[98] Default logics, non-monotonic logics and circumscription are forms of logic designed to help with default reasoning and the qualification problem.[54] Several extensions of logic have been designed to handle specific domains of knowledge, such as description logics;[50] situation calculus, event calculus and fluent calculus (for representing events and time);[51] causal calculus;[52] belief calculus (belief revision); and modal logics.[53] Logics to model contradictory or inconsistent statements arising in multi-agent systems have also been designed, such as paraconsistent logics.[99]

Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning
Main articles: Bayesian network, Hidden Markov model, Kalman filter, Particle filter, Decision theory, and Utility theory

Expectation-maximization clustering of Old Faithful eruption data starts from a random guess but then successfully converges on an accurate clustering of the two physically distinct modes of eruption.
Many problems in AI (including in reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics.[100] Bayesian networks[101] are a very general tool that can be used for various problems, including reasoning (using the Bayesian inference algorithm),[m][103] learning (using the expectation-maximization algorithm),[n][105] planning (using decision networks)[106] and perception (using dynamic Bayesian networks).[107] Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing and finding explanations for streams of data, helping perception systems to analyze processes that occur over time (e.g., hidden Markov models or Kalman filters).[107]

A key concept from the science of economics is "utility", a measure of how valuable something is to an intelligent agent. Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory, decision analysis,[108] and information value theory.[109] These tools include models such as Markov decision processes,[110] dynamic decision networks,[107] game theory and mechanism design.[111]

Classifiers and statistical learning methods
Main articles: Statistical classification and Machine learning
The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers ("if shiny then diamond") and controllers ("if diamond then pick up"). Controllers do, however, also classify conditions before inferring actions, and therefore classification forms a central part of many AI systems. Classifiers are functions that use pattern matching to determine the closest match. They can be tuned according to examples, making them very attractive for use in AI. These examples are known as observations or patterns. In supervised learning, each pattern belongs to a certain predefined class. A class is a decision that has to be made. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set. When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience.[112]

A classifier can be trained in various ways; there are many statistical and machine learning approaches. The decision tree is the simplest and most widely used symbolic machine learning algorithm.[113] K-nearest neighbor algorithm was the most widely used analogical AI until the mid-1990s.[114] Kernel methods such as the support vector machine (SVM) displaced k-nearest neighbor in the 1990s.[115] The naive Bayes classifier is reportedly the "most widely used learner"[116] at Google, due in part to its scalability.[117] Neural networks are also used for classification.[118]

Classifier performance depends greatly on the characteristics of the data to be classified, such as the dataset size, distribution of samples across classes, dimensionality, and the level of noise. Model-based classifiers perform well if the assumed model is an extremely good fit for the actual data. Otherwise, if no matching model is available, and if accuracy (rather than speed or scalability) is the sole concern, conventional wisdom is that discriminative classifiers (especially SVM) tend to be more accurate than model-based classifiers such as "naive Bayes" on most practical data sets.[119]

Artificial neural networks
Main articles: Artificial neural network and Connectionism

A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the human brain.
Neural networks[118] were inspired by the architecture of neurons in the human brain. A simple "neuron" N accepts input from other neurons, each of which, when activated (or "fired"), casts a weighted "vote" for or against whether neuron N should itself activate. Learning requires an algorithm to adjust these weights based on the training data; one simple algorithm (dubbed "fire together, wire together") is to increase the weight between two connected neurons when the activation of one triggers the successful activation of another. Neurons have a continuous spectrum of activation; in addition, neurons can process inputs in a nonlinear way rather than weighing straightforward votes.

Modern neural networks model complex relationships between inputs and outputs and find patterns in data. They can learn continuous functions and even digital logical operations. Neural networks can be viewed as a type of mathematical optimization – they perform gradient descent on a multi-dimensional topology that was created by training the network. The most common training technique is the backpropagation algorithm.[120] Other learning techniques for neural networks are Hebbian learning ("fire together, wire together"), GMDH or competitive learning.[121]

The main categories of networks are acyclic or feedforward neural networks (where the signal passes in only one direction) and recurrent neural networks (which allow feedback and short-term memories of previous input events). Among the most popular feedforward networks are perceptrons, multi-layer perceptrons and radial basis networks.[122]

Deep learning
Representing Images on Multiple Layers of Abstraction in Deep Learning
Representing images on multiple layers of abstraction in deep learning[123]
Deep learning[124] uses several layers of neurons between the network's inputs and outputs. The multiple layers can progressively extract higher-level features from the raw input. For example, in image processing, lower layers may identify edges, while higher layers may identify the concepts relevant to a human such as digits or letters or faces.[125] Deep learning has drastically improved the performance of programs in many important subfields of artificial intelligence, including computer vision, speech recognition, image classification[126] and others.

Deep learning often uses convolutional neural networks for many or all of its layers. In a convolutional layer, each neuron receives input from only a restricted area of the previous layer called the neuron's receptive field. This can substantially reduce the number of weighted connections between neurons,[127] and creates a hierarchy similar to the organization of the animal visual cortex.[128]

In a recurrent neural network (RNN) the signal will propagate through a layer more than once;[129] thus, an RNN is an example of deep learning.[130] RNNs can be trained by gradient descent,[131] however long-term gradients which are back-propagated can "vanish" (that is, they can tend to zero) or "explode" (that is, they can tend to infinity), known as the vanishing gradient problem.[132] The long short term memory (LSTM) technique can prevent this in most cases.[133]

Specialized languages and hardware
Main articles: Programming languages for artificial intelligence and Hardware for artificial intelligence
Specialized languages for artificial intelligence have been developed, such as Lisp, Prolog, TensorFlow and many others. Hardware developed for AI includes AI accelerators and neuromorphic computing.

Applications
Main article: Applications of artificial intelligence
See also: Embodied cognition and Legal informatics

For this project the AI had to learn the typical patterns in the colors and brushstrokes of Renaissance painter Raphael. The portrait shows the face of the actress Ornella Muti, "painted" by AI in the style of Raphael.
AI is relevant to any intellectual task.[134] Modern artificial intelligence techniques are pervasive and are too numerous to list here.[135] Frequently, when a technique reaches mainstream use, it is no longer considered artificial intelligence; this phenomenon is described as the AI effect.[136]

In the 2010s, AI applications were at the heart of the most commercially successful areas of computing, and have become a ubiquitous feature of daily life. AI is used in search engines (such as Google Search), targeting online advertisements,[137] recommendation systems (offered by Netflix, YouTube or Amazon), driving internet traffic,[138][139] targeted advertising (AdSense, Facebook), virtual assistants (such as Siri or Alexa),[140] autonomous vehicles (including drones and self-driving cars), automatic language translation (Microsoft Translator, Google Translate), facial recognition (Apple's Face ID or Microsoft's DeepFace), image labeling (used by Facebook, Apple's iPhoto and TikTok) and spam filtering.

There are also thousands of successful AI applications used to solve problems for specific industries or institutions. A few examples are energy storage,[141] deepfakes,[142] medical diagnosis, military logistics, or supply chain management.

Game playing has been a test of AI's strength since the 1950s. Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, on 11 May 1997.[143] In 2011, in a Jeopardy! quiz show exhibition match, IBM's question answering system, Watson, defeated the two greatest Jeopardy! champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, by a significant margin.[144] In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol, becoming the first computer Go-playing system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps.[145] Other programs handle imperfect-information games; such as for poker at a superhuman level, Pluribus[o] and Cepheus.[147] DeepMind in the 2010s developed a "generalized artificial intelligence" that could learn many diverse Atari games on its own.[148]

By 2020, Natural Language Processing systems such as the enormous GPT-3 (then by far the largest artificial neural network) were matching human performance on pre-existing benchmarks, albeit without the system attaining a commonsense understanding of the contents of the benchmarks.[149] DeepMind's AlphaFold 2 (2020) demonstrated the ability to approximate, in hours rather than months, the 3D structure of a protein.[150] Other applications predict the result of judicial decisions,[151] create art (such as poetry or painting) and prove mathematical theorems.

Smart traffic lights


Artificially intelligent traffic lights use cameras with radar, ultrasonic acoustic location sensors, and predictive algorithms to improve traffic flow
Smart traffic lights have been developed at Carnegie Mellon since 2009. Professor Stephen Smith has started a company since then Surtrac that has installed smart traffic control systems in 22 cities. It costs about $20,000 per intersection to install. Drive time has been reduced by 25% and traffic jam waiting time has been reduced by 40% at the intersections it has been installed.[152]

Intellectual Property

AI Patent families for functional application categories and sub categories. Computer vision represents 49 percent of patent families related to a functional application in 2016.
In 2019, WIPO reported that AI was the most prolific emerging technology in terms of the number of patent applications and granted patents, the Internet of things was estimated to be the largest in terms of market size. It was followed, again in market size, by big data technologies, robotics, AI, 3D printing and the fifth generation of mobile services (5G).[153] Since AI emerged in the 1950s, 340,000 AI-related patent applications were filed by innovators and 1.6 million scientific papers have been published by researchers, with the majority of all AI-related patent filings published since 2013. Companies represent 26 out of the top 30 AI patent applicants, with universities or public research organizations accounting for the remaining four.[154] The ratio of scientific papers to inventions has significantly decreased from 8:1 in 2010 to 3:1 in 2016, which is attributed to be indicative of a shift from theoretical research to the use of AI technologies in commercial products and services. Machine learning is the dominant AI technique disclosed in patents and is included in more than one-third of all identified inventions (134,777 machine learning patents filed for a total of 167,038 AI patents filed in 2016), with computer vision being the most popular functional application. AI-related patents not only disclose AI techniques and applications, they often also refer to an application field or industry. Twenty application fields were identified in 2016 and included, in order of magnitude: telecommunications (15 percent), transportation (15 percent), life and medical sciences (12 percent), and personal devices, computing and human–computer interaction (11 percent). Other sectors included banking, entertainment, security, industry and manufacturing, agriculture, and networks (including social networks, smart cities and the Internet of things). IBM has the largest portfolio of AI patents with 8,290 patent applications, followed by Microsoft with 5,930 patent applications.[154]

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Defining artificial intelligence
Main articles: Turing test, Intelligent agent, Dartmouth workshop, and Synthetic intelligence
Alan Turing wrote in 1950 "I propose to consider the question 'can machines think'?"[155] He advised changing the question from whether a machine "thinks", to "whether or not it is possible for machinery to show intelligent behaviour".[155] He devised the Turing test, which measures the ability of a machine to simulate human conversation.[156] Since we can only observe the behavior of the machine, it does not matter if it is "actually" thinking or literally has a "mind". Turing notes that we can not determine these things about other people[p] but "it is usual to have a polite convention that everyone thinks"[157]

Russell and Norvig agree with Turing that AI must be defined in terms of "acting" and not "thinking".[158] However, they are critical that the test compares machines to people. "Aeronautical engineering texts," they wrote, "do not define the goal of their field as making 'machines that fly so exactly like pigeons that they can fool other pigeons.'"[159] AI founder John McCarthy agreed, writing that "Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human intelligence".[160]

McCarthy defines intelligence as "the computational part of the ability to achieve goals in the world."[161] Another AI founder, Marvin Minsky similarly defines it as "the ability to solve hard problems".[162] These definitions view intelligence in terms of well-defined problems with well-defined solutions, where both the difficulty of the problem and the performance of the program are direct measures of the "intelligence" of the machine—and no other philosophical discussion is required, or may not even be possible.

A definition that has also been adopted by Google[163][better source needed] - major practitionary in the field of AI. This definition stipulated the ability of systems to synthesize information as the manifestation of intelligence, similar to the way it is defined in biological intelligence.

Evaluating approaches to AI
No established unifying theory or paradigm has guided AI research for most of its history.[q] The unprecedented success of statistical machine learning in the 2010s eclipsed all other approaches (so much so that some sources, especially in the business world, use the term "artificial intelligence" to mean "machine learning with neural networks"). This approach is mostly sub-symbolic, neat, soft and narrow (see below). Critics argue that these questions may have to be revisited by future generations of AI researchers.

Symbolic AI and its limits
Main articles: Symbolic AI, Physical symbol systems hypothesis, Moravec's paradox, and Hubert Dreyfus's views on artificial intelligence
Symbolic AI (or "GOFAI")[165] simulated the high-level conscious reasoning that people use when they solve puzzles, express legal reasoning and do mathematics. They were highly successful at "intelligent" tasks such as algebra or IQ tests. In the 1960s, Newell and Simon proposed the physical symbol systems hypothesis: "A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action."[166]

However, the symbolic approach failed on many tasks that humans solve easily, such as learning, recognizing an object or commonsense reasoning. Moravec's paradox is the discovery that high-level "intelligent" tasks were easy for AI, but low level "instinctive" tasks were extremely difficult.[167] Philosopher Hubert Dreyfus had argued since the 1960s that human expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol manipulation, and on having a "feel" for the situation, rather than explicit symbolic knowledge.[168] Although his arguments had been ridiculed and ignored when they were first presented, eventually, AI research came to agree.[r][47]

The issue is not resolved: sub-symbolic reasoning can make many of the same inscrutable mistakes that human intuition does, such as algorithmic bias. Critics such as Noam Chomsky argue continuing research into symbolic AI will still be necessary to attain general intelligence,[170][171] in part because sub-symbolic AI is a move away from explainable AI: it can be difficult or impossible to understand why a modern statistical AI program made a particular decision. The emerging field of neurosymbolic artificial intelligence attempts to bridge the two approaches.

Neat vs. scruffy
Main article: Neats and scruffies
"Neats" hope that intelligent behavior is described using simple, elegant principles (such as logic, optimization, or neural networks). "Scruffies" expect that it necessarily requires solving a large number of unrelated problems (especially in areas like common sense reasoning). This issue was actively discussed in the 70s and 80s,[172] but in the 1990s mathematical methods and solid scientific standards became the norm, a transition that Russell and Norvig termed "the victory of the neats".[173]

Soft vs. hard computing
Main article: Soft computing
Finding a provably correct or optimal solution is intractable for many important problems.[46] Soft computing is a set of techniques, including genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic and neural networks, that are tolerant of imprecision, uncertainty, partial truth and approximation. Soft computing was introduced in the late 80s and most successful AI programs in the 21st century are examples of soft computing with neural networks.

Narrow vs. general AI
Main article: Artificial general intelligence
AI researchers are divided as to whether to pursue the goals of artificial general intelligence and superintelligence (general AI) directly or to solve as many specific problems as possible (narrow AI) in hopes these solutions will lead indirectly to the field's long-term goals.[174][175] General intelligence is difficult to define and difficult to measure, and modern AI has had more verifiable successes by focusing on specific problems with specific solutions. The experimental sub-field of artificial general intelligence studies this area exclusively.

Machine consciousness, sentience and mind
Main articles: Philosophy of artificial intelligence and Artificial consciousness
The philosophy of mind does not know whether a machine can have a mind, consciousness and mental states, in the same sense that human beings do. This issue considers the internal experiences of the machine, rather than its external behavior. Mainstream AI research considers this issue irrelevant because it does not affect the goals of the field. Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig observe that most AI researchers "don't care about the [philosophy of AI] – as long as the program works, they don't care whether you call it a simulation of intelligence or real intelligence."[176] However, the question has become central to the philosophy of mind. It is also typically the central question at issue in artificial intelligence in fiction.

Consciousness
Main articles: Hard problem of consciousness and Theory of mind
David Chalmers identified two problems in understanding the mind, which he named the "hard" and "easy" problems of consciousness.[177] The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes signals, makes plans and controls behavior. The hard problem is explaining how this feels or why it should feel like anything at all. Human information processing is easy to explain, however, human subjective experience is difficult to explain. For example, it is easy to imagine a color-blind person who has learned to identify which objects in their field of view are red, but it is not clear what would be required for the person to know what red looks like.[178]

Computationalism and functionalism
Main articles: Computational theory of mind, Functionalism (philosophy of mind), and Chinese room
Computationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind that the human mind is an information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing. Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware and thus may be a solution to the mind-body problem. This philosophical position was inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the 1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers Jerry Fodor and Hilary Putnam.[179]

Philosopher John Searle characterized this position as "strong AI": "The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds."[s] Searle counters this assertion with his Chinese room argument, which attempts to show that, even if a machine perfectly simulates human behavior, there is still no reason to suppose it also has a mind.[182]

Robot rights
Main article: Robot rights
If a machine has a mind and subjective experience, then it may also have sentience (the ability to feel), and if so, then it could also suffer, and thus it would be entitled to certain rights.[183] Any hypothetical robot rights would lie on a spectrum with animal rights and human rights.[184] This issue has been considered in fiction for centuries,[185] and is now being considered by, for example, California's Institute for the Future; however, critics argue that the discussion is premature.[186]

Future
Superintelligence
Main articles: Superintelligence, Technological singularity, and Transhumanism
A superintelligence, hyperintelligence, or superhuman intelligence, is a hypothetical agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human mind. Superintelligence may also refer to the form or degree of intelligence possessed by such an agent.[175]

If research into artificial general intelligence produced sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to reprogram and improve itself. The improved software would be even better at improving itself, leading to recursive self-improvement.[187] Its intelligence would increase exponentially in an intelligence explosion and could dramatically surpass humans. Science fiction writer Vernor Vinge named this scenario the "singularity".[188] Because it is difficult or impossible to know the limits of intelligence or the capabilities of superintelligent machines, the technological singularity is an occurrence beyond which events are unpredictable or even unfathomable.[189]

Robot designer Hans Moravec, cyberneticist Kevin Warwick, and inventor Ray Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines will merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either. This idea, called transhumanism, has roots in Aldous Huxley and Robert Ettinger.[190]

Edward Fredkin argues that "artificial intelligence is the next stage in evolution", an idea first proposed by Samuel Butler's "Darwin among the Machines" as far back as 1863, and expanded upon by George Dyson in his book of the same name in 1998.[191]

Risks
Technological unemployment
Main articles: Workplace impact of artificial intelligence and Technological unemployment
In the past, technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total employment, but economists acknowledge that "we're in uncharted territory" with AI.[192] A survey of economists showed disagreement about whether the increasing use of robots and AI will cause a substantial increase in long-term unemployment, but they generally agree that it could be a net benefit if productivity gains are redistributed.[193] Subjective estimates of the risk vary widely; for example, Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey estimate 47% of U.S. jobs are at "high risk" of potential automation, while an OECD report classifies only 9% of U.S. jobs as "high risk".[t][195]

Unlike previous waves of automation, many middle-class jobs may be eliminated by artificial intelligence; The Economist states that "the worry that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution" is "worth taking seriously".[196] Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy.[197]

Bad actors and weaponized AI
Main articles: Lethal autonomous weapon and Artificial intelligence arms race
AI provides a number of tools that are particularly useful for authoritarian governments: smart spyware, face recognition and voice recognition allow widespread surveillance; such surveillance allows machine learning to classify potential enemies of the state and can prevent them from hiding; recommendation systems can precisely target propaganda and misinformation for maximum effect; deepfakes aid in producing misinformation; advanced AI can make centralized decision making more competitive with liberal and decentralized systems such as markets.[198]

Terrorists, criminals and rogue states may use other forms of weaponized AI such as advanced digital warfare and lethal autonomous weapons. By 2015, over fifty countries were reported to be researching battlefield robots.[199]

Machine-learning AI is also able to design tens of thousands of toxic molecules in a matter of hours.[200]

Algorithmic bias
Main article: Algorithmic bias
AI programs can become biased after learning from real-world data. It is not typically introduced by the system designers but is learned by the program, and thus the programmers are often unaware that the bias exists.[201] Bias can be inadvertently introduced by the way training data is selected.[202] It can also emerge from correlations: AI is used to classify individuals into groups and then make predictions assuming that the individual will resemble other members of the group. In some cases, this assumption may be unfair.[203] An example of this is COMPAS, a commercial program widely used by U.S. courts to assess the likelihood of a defendant becoming a recidivist. ProPublica claims that the COMPAS-assigned recidivism risk level of black defendants is far more likely to be overestimated than that of white defendants, despite the fact that the program was not told the races of the defendants.[204] Other examples where algorithmic bias can lead to unfair outcomes are when AI is used for credit rating or hiring.

At its 2022 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (ACM FAccT 2022) the Association for Computing Machinery, in Seoul, South Korea, presented and published findings recommending that until AI and robotics systems are demonstrated to be free of bias mistakes, they are unsafe and the use of self-learning neural networks trained on vast, unregulated sources of flawed internet data should be curtailed.[205]

Existential risk
Main articles: Existential risk from artificial general intelligence and AI alignment
Superintelligent AI may be able to improve itself to the point that humans could not control it. This could, as physicist Stephen Hawking puts it, "spell the end of the human race".[206] Philosopher Nick Bostrom argues that sufficiently intelligent AI, if it chooses actions based on achieving some goal, will exhibit convergent behavior such as acquiring resources or protecting itself from being shut down. If this AI's goals do not fully reflect humanity's, it might need to harm humanity to acquire more resources or prevent itself from being shut down, ultimately to better achieve its goal. He concludes that AI poses a risk to mankind, however humble or "friendly" its stated goals might be.[207] Political scientist Charles T. Rubin argues that "any sufficiently advanced benevolence may be indistinguishable from malevolence." Humans should not assume machines or robots would treat us favorably because there is no a priori reason to believe that they would share our system of morality.[208]

The opinion of experts and industry insiders is mixed, with sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superhumanly-capable AI.[209] Stephen Hawking, Microsoft founder Bill Gates, history professor Yuval Noah Harari, and SpaceX founder Elon Musk have all expressed serious misgivings about the future of AI.[210] Prominent tech titans including Peter Thiel (Amazon Web Services) and Musk have committed more than $1 billion to nonprofit companies that champion responsible AI development, such as OpenAI and the Future of Life Institute.[211] Mark Zuckerberg (CEO, Facebook) has said that artificial intelligence is helpful in its current form and will continue to assist humans.[212] Other experts argue is that the risks are far enough in the future to not be worth researching, or that humans will be valuable from the perspective of a superintelligent machine.[213] Rodney Brooks, in particular, has said that "malevolent" AI is still centuries away.[u]

Copyright
AI's decisions making abilities raises the questions of legal responsibility and copyright status of created works. This issues are being refined in various jurisdictions.[215]

Ethical machines
Main articles: Machine ethics, Friendly artificial intelligence, Artificial moral agents, and Human Compatible
Friendly AI are machines that have been designed from the beginning to minimize risks and to make choices that benefit humans. Eliezer Yudkowsky, who coined the term, argues that developing friendly AI should be a higher research priority: it may require a large investment and it must be completed before AI becomes an existential risk.[216]

Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to make ethical decisions. The field of machine ethics provides machines with ethical principles and procedures for resolving ethical dilemmas.[217] Machine ethics is also called machine morality, computational ethics or computational morality,[217] and was founded at an AAAI symposium in 2005.[218]

Other approaches include Wendell Wallach's "artificial moral agents"[219] and Stuart J. Russell's three principles for developing provably beneficial machines.[220]

Regulation
Main articles: Regulation of artificial intelligence, Regulation of algorithms, and AI alignment
The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating artificial intelligence (AI); it is therefore related to the broader regulation of algorithms.[221] The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions globally.[222] Between 2016 and 2020, more than 30 countries adopted dedicated strategies for AI.[43] Most EU member states had released national AI strategies, as had Canada, China, India, Japan, Mauritius, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, US and Vietnam. Others were in the process of elaborating their own AI strategy, including Bangladesh, Malaysia and Tunisia.[43] The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology.[43] Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt, and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 calling for a government commission to regulate AI.[223]

In fiction
Main article: Artificial intelligence in fiction

The word "robot" itself was coined by Karel Čapek in his 1921 play R.U.R., the title standing for "Rossum's Universal Robots".
Thought-capable artificial beings have appeared as storytelling devices since antiquity,[14] and have been a persistent theme in science fiction.[16]

A common trope in these works began with Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, where a human creation becomes a threat to its masters. This includes such works as Arthur C. Clarke's and Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey (both 1968), with HAL 9000, the murderous computer in charge of the Discovery One spaceship, as well as The Terminator (1984) and The Matrix (1999). In contrast, the rare loyal robots such as Gort from The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951) and Bishop from Aliens (1986) are less prominent in popular culture.[224]

Isaac Asimov introduced the Three Laws of Robotics in many books and stories, most notably the "Multivac" series about a super-intelligent computer of the same name. Asimov's laws are often brought up during lay discussions of machine ethics;[225] while almost all artificial intelligence researchers are familiar with Asimov's laws through popular culture, they generally consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their ambiguity.[226]

Transhumanism (the merging of humans and machines) is explored in the manga Ghost in the Shell and the science-fiction series Dune.

Several works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental question of what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have the ability to feel, and thus to suffer. This appears in Karel Čapek's R.U.R., the films A.I. Artificial Intelligence and Ex Machina, as well as the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, by Philip K. Dick. Dick considers the idea that our understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created with artificial intelligence.[227]

See also
AI alignment – Issue of ensuring beneficial AI
Artificial intelligence arms race – Arms race for the most advanced AI-related technologies
Behavior selection algorithm – Algorithm that selects actions for intelligent agents
Business process automation
Case-based reasoning – Process of solving new problems based on the solutions of similar past problems
Emergent algorithm
Female gendering of AI technologies – Design of digital assistants as female
Glossary of artificial intelligence – List of definitions of terms and concepts commonly used in the study of artificial intelligence
Operations research – Discipline concerning the application of advanced analytical methods
Robotic process automation – Form of business process automation technology
Synthetic intelligence – Alternate term for or form of artificial intelligence
Universal basic income – Welfare system of unconditional income
Weak artificial intelligence – Form of artificial intelligence
Data sources - The list of data sources for study and research.
Explanatory notes
 This list of intelligent traits is based on the topics covered by the major AI textbooks, including: Russell & Norvig (2003), Luger & Stubblefield (2004), Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998) and Nilsson (1998)
 This statement comes from the proposal for the Dartmouth workshop of 1956, which reads: "Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it."[12]
 Russel and Norvig note in the textbook Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.), section 1.5: "In the longer term, we face the difficult problem of controlling superintelligent AI systems that may evolve in unpredictable ways." while referring to computer scientists, philosophers, and technologists.
 Daniel Crevier wrote "the conference is generally recognized as the official birthdate of the new science."[22] Russell and Norvifg call the conference "the birth of artificial intelligence."[23]
 Russell and Norvig wrote "for the next 20 years the field would be dominated by these people and their students."[23]
 Russell and Norvig wrote "it was astonishing whenever a computer did anything kind of smartish".[25]
 The programs described are Arthur Samuel's checkers program for the IBM 701, Daniel Bobrow's STUDENT, Newell and Simon's Logic Theorist and Terry Winograd's SHRDLU.
 Embodied approaches to AI[35] were championed by Hans Moravec[36] and Rodney Brooks[37] and went by many names: Nouvelle AI,[37] Developmental robotics,[38] situated AI, behavior-based AI as well as others. A similar movement in cognitive science was the embodied mind thesis.
 Clark wrote: "After a half-decade of quiet breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, 2015 has been a landmark year. Computers are smarter and learning faster than ever."[9]
 Alan Turing discussed the centrality of learning as early as 1950, in his classic paper "Computing Machinery and Intelligence".[61] In 1956, at the original Dartmouth AI summer conference, Ray Solomonoff wrote a report on unsupervised probabilistic machine learning: "An Inductive Inference Machine".[62]
 This is a form of Tom Mitchell's widely quoted definition of machine learning: "A computer program is set to learn from an experience E with respect to some task T and some performance measure P if its performance on T as measured by P improves with experience E."[63]
 Alan Turing suggested in "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" that a "thinking machine" would need to be educated like a child.[61] Developmental robotics is a modern version of the idea.[38]
 Compared with symbolic logic, formal Bayesian inference is computationally expensive. For inference to be tractable, most observations must be conditionally independent of one another. AdSense uses a Bayesian network with over 300 million edges to learn which ads to serve.[102]
 Expectation-maximization, one of the most popular algorithms in machine learning, allows clustering in the presence of unknown latent variables.[104]
 The Smithsonian reports: "Pluribus has bested poker pros in a series of six-player no-limit Texas Hold'em games, reaching a milestone in artificial intelligence research. It is the first bot to beat humans in a complex multiplayer competition."[146]
 See Problem of other minds
 Nils Nilsson wrote in 1983: "Simply put, there is wide disagreement in the field about what AI is all about."[164]
 Daniel Crevier wrote that "time has proven the accuracy and perceptiveness of some of Dreyfus's comments. Had he formulated them less aggressively, constructive actions they suggested might have been taken much earlier."[169]
 Searle presented this definition of "Strong AI" in 1999.[180] Searle's original formulation was "The appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right programs can be literally said to understand and have other cognitive states."[181] Strong AI is defined similarly by Russell and Norvig: "The assertion that machines could possibly act intelligently (or, perhaps better, act as if they were intelligent) is called the 'weak AI' hypothesis by philosophers, and the assertion that machines that do so are actually thinking (as opposed to simulating thinking) is called the 'strong AI' hypothesis."[176]
 See table 4; 9% is both the OECD average and the US average.[194]
 Rodney Brooks writes, "I think it is a mistake to be worrying about us developing malevolent AI anytime in the next few hundred years. I think the worry stems from a fundamental error in not distinguishing the difference between the very real recent advances in a particular aspect of AI and the enormity and complexity of building sentient volitional intelligence."[214]
References
 Google (2016).
 McCorduck (2004), p. 204.
 Ashok83 (2019).
 Schank (1991), p. 38.
 Crevier (1993), p. 109.
 Funding initiatives in the early 80s: Fifth Generation Project (Japan), Alvey (UK), Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (US), Strategic Computing Initiative (US):
McCorduck (2004, pp. 426–441)
Crevier (1993, pp. 161–162, 197–203, 211, 240)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 24)
NRC (1999, pp. 210–211)
Newquist (1994, pp. 235–248)
 First AI Winter, Lighthill report, Mansfield Amendment
Crevier (1993, pp. 115–117)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 22)
NRC (1999, pp. 212–213)
Howe (1994)
Newquist (1994, pp. 189–201)
 Second AI Winter:
McCorduck (2004, pp. 430–435)
Crevier (1993, pp. 209–210)
NRC (1999, pp. 214–216)
Newquist (1994, pp. 301–318)
 Clark (2015b).
 AI widely used in late 1990s:
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 28)
Kurzweil (2005, p. 265)
NRC (1999, pp. 216–222)
Newquist (1994, pp. 189–201)
 Pennachin & Goertzel (2007); Roberts (2016)
 McCarthy et al. (1955).
 Newquist (1994), pp. 45–53.
 AI in myth:
McCorduck (2004, pp. 4–5)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 939)
 McCorduck (2004), pp. 17–25.
 McCorduck (2004), pp. 340–400.
 Berlinski (2000).
 AI's immediate precursors:
McCorduck (2004, pp. 51–107)
Crevier (1993, pp. 27–32)
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 15, 940)
Moravec (1988, p. 3)
 Russell & Norvig (2009), p. 16.
 Manyika 2022, p. 9.
 Manyika 2022, p. 10.
 Crevier (1993), pp. 47–49.
 Russell & Norvig (2003), p. 17.
 Dartmouth workshop:
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 17)
McCorduck (2004, pp. 111–136)
NRC (1999, pp. 200–201)
The proposal:
McCarthy et al. (1955)
 Russell & Norvig (2003), p. 18.
 Successful Symbolic AI programs:
McCorduck (2004, pp. 243–252)
Crevier (1993, pp. 52–107)
Moravec (1988, p. 9)
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 18–21)
 AI heavily funded in 1960s:
McCorduck (2004, p. 131)
Crevier (1993, pp. 51, 64–65)
NRC (1999, pp. 204–205)
 Howe (1994).
 Newquist (1994), pp. 86–86.
 Simon (1965, p. 96) quoted in Crevier (1993, p. 109)
 Minsky (1967, p. 2) quoted in Crevier (1993, p. 109)
 Lighthill (1973).
 Expert systems:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 22–24)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 227–331)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 17.4)
McCorduck (2004, pp. 327–335, 434–435)
Crevier (1993, pp. 145–62, 197–203)
Newquist (1994, pp. 155–183)
 Nilsson (1998), p. 7.
 McCorduck (2004), pp. 454–462.
 Moravec (1988).
 Brooks (1990).
 Developmental robotics:
Weng et al. (2001)
Lungarella et al. (2003)
Asada et al. (2009)
Oudeyer (2010)
 Revival of connectionism:
Crevier (1993, pp. 214–215)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 25)
 Formal and narrow methods adopted in the 1990s:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 25–26)
McCorduck (2004, pp. 486–487)
 McKinsey (2018).
 MIT Sloan Management Review (2018); Lorica (2017)
 UNESCO (2021).
 Problem solving, puzzle solving, game playing and deduction:
Russell & Norvig (2003, chpt. 3–9)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, chpt. 2,3,7,9)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, chpt. 3,4,6,8)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 7–12)
 Uncertain reasoning:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 452–644)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 345–395)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 333–381)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 19)
 Intractability and efficiency and the combinatorial explosion:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 9, 21–22)
 Psychological evidence of the prevalence sub-symbolic reasoning and knowledge:
Kahneman (2011)
Wason & Shapiro (1966)
Kahneman, Slovic & Tversky (1982)
Dreyfus & Dreyfus (1986)
 Knowledge representation and knowledge engineering:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 260–266, 320–363)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 23–46, 69–81, 169–233, 235–277, 281–298, 319–345)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 227–243),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 17.1–17.4, 18)
 Russell & Norvig (2003), pp. 320–328.
 Representing categories and relations: Semantic networks, description logics, inheritance (including frames and scripts):
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 349–354),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 174–177),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 248–258),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 18.3)
 Representing events and time:Situation calculus, event calculus, fluent calculus (including solving the frame problem):
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 328–341),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 281–298),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 18.2)
 Causal calculus:
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 335–337)
 Representing knowledge about knowledge: Belief calculus, modal logics:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 341–344),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 275–277)
 Default reasoning, Frame problem, default logic, non-monotonic logics, circumscription, closed world assumption, abduction:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 354–360)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 248–256, 323–335)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 335–363)
Nilsson (1998, ~18.3.3)
(Poole et al. places abduction under "default reasoning". Luger et al. places this under "uncertain reasoning").
 Breadth of commonsense knowledge:
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 21),
Crevier (1993, pp. 113–114),
Moravec (1988, p. 13),
Lenat & Guha (1989, Introduction)
 Smoliar & Zhang (1994).
 Neumann & Möller (2008).
 Kuperman, Reichley & Bailey (2006).
 McGarry (2005).
 Bertini, Del Bimbo & Torniai (2006).
 Turing (1950).
 Solomonoff (1956).
 Russell & Norvig (2003), pp. 649–788.
 Learning:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 649–788)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 397–438)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 385–542)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 3.3, 10.3, 17.5, 20)
 Reinforcement learning:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 763–788)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 442–449)
 The Economist (2016).
 Jordan & Mitchell (2015).
 Natural language processing (NLP):
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 790–831)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 91–104)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 591–632)
 Applications of NLP:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 840–857)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 623–630)
 Modern statistical approaches to NLP:
Cambria & White (2014)
 Vincent (2019).
 Machine perception:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 537–581, 863–898)
Nilsson (1998, ~chpt. 6)
 Speech recognition:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 568–578)
 Object recognition:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 885–892)
 Computer vision:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 863–898)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 6)
 MIT AIL (2014).
 Affective computing:
Thro (1993)
Edelson (1991)
Tao & Tan (2005)
Scassellati (2002)
 Waddell (2018).
 Poria et al. (2017).
 The Society of Mind:
Minsky (1986)
Moravec's "golden spike":
Moravec (1988, p. 20)
Multi-agent systems, hybrid intelligent systems, agent architectures, cognitive architecture:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 27, 932, 970–972)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 25)
 Domingos (2015), Chpt. 9.
 Artificial brain as an approach to AGI:
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 957)
Crevier (1993, pp. 271 & 279)
Goertzel et al. (2010)
A few of the people who make some form of the argument:
Moravec (1988, p. 20)
Kurzweil (2005, p. 262)
Hawkins & Blakeslee (2005)
 Search algorithms:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 59–189)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 113–163)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 79–164, 193–219)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 7–12)
 Forward chaining, backward chaining, Horn clauses, and logical deduction as search:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 217–225, 280–294)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. ~46–52)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 62–73)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 4.2, 7.2)
 State space search and planning:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 382–387)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 298–305)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 10.1–2)
 Moving and configuration space:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 916–932)
 Uninformed searches (breadth first search, depth-first search and general state space search):
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 59–93)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 113–132)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 79–121)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 8)
 Heuristic or informed searches (e.g., greedy best first and A*):
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 94–109)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. pp. 132–147)
Poole & Mackworth (2017, Section 3.6)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 133–150)
 Tecuci (2012).
 Optimization searches:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 110–116, 120–129)
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 56–163)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 127–133)
 Genetic programming and genetic algorithms:
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 509–530)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 4.2)
 Artificial life and society based learning:
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 530–541)
Merkle & Middendorf (2013)
 Logic:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 194–310),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 35–77),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 13–16)
 Satplan:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 402–407),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 300–301),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 21)
 Explanation based learning, relevance based learning, inductive logic programming, case based reasoning:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 678–710),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 414–416),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. ~422–442),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 10.3, 17.5)
 Propositional logic:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 204–233),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 45–50)
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 13)
 First-order logic and features such as equality:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 240–310),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 268–275),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 50–62),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 15)
 Fuzzy logic:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 526–527)
Scientific American (1999)
 Abe, Jair Minoro; Nakamatsu, Kazumi (2009). "Multi-agent Systems and Paraconsistent Knowledge". Knowledge Processing and Decision Making in Agent-Based Systems. Studies in Computational Intelligence. Vol. 170. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 101–121. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88049-3_5. eISSN 1860-9503. ISBN 978-3-540-88048-6. ISSN 1860-949X. Retrieved 2 August 2022.
 Stochastic methods for uncertain reasoning:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 462–644),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 345–395),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 165–191, 333–381),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 19)
 Bayesian networks:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 492–523),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 361–381),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. ~182–190, ≈363–379),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 19.3–4)
 Domingos (2015), chapter 6.
 Bayesian inference algorithm:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 504–519),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 361–381),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. ~363–379),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 19.4 & 7)
 Domingos (2015), p. 210.
 Bayesian learning and the expectation-maximization algorithm:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 712–724),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 424–433),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 20)
Domingos (2015, p. 210)
 Bayesian decision theory and Bayesian decision networks:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 597–600)
 Stochastic temporal models:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 537–581)
Dynamic Bayesian networks:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 551–557)
Hidden Markov model:
(Russell & Norvig 2003, pp. 549–551)
Kalman filters:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 551–557)
 decision theory and decision analysis:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 584–597),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 381–394)
 Information value theory:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 600–604)
 Markov decision processes and dynamic decision networks:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 613–631)
 Game theory and mechanism design:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 631–643)
 Statistical learning methods and classifiers:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 712–754),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 453–541)
 Decision tree:
Domingos (2015, p. 88)
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 653–664),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 403–408),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 408–417)
 K-nearest neighbor algorithm:
Domingos (2015, p. 187)
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 733–736)
 kernel methods such as the support vector machine:
Domingos (2015, p. 88)
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 749–752)
Gaussian mixture model:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 725–727)
 Domingos (2015), p. 152.
 Naive Bayes classifier:
Domingos (2015, p. 152)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 718)
 Neural networks:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 736–748),
Poole, Mackworth & Goebel (1998, pp. 408–414),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 453–505),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 3)
Domingos (2015, Chapter 4)
 Classifier performance:
van der Walt & Bernard (2006)
Russell & Norvig (2009, 18.12: Learning from Examples: Summary)
 Backpropagation:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 744–748),
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 467–474),
Nilsson (1998, chpt. 3.3)
Paul Werbos' introduction of backpropagation to AI:
Werbos (1974); Werbos (1982)
Automatic differentiation, an essential precursor:
Linnainmaa (1970); Griewank (2012)
 Competitive learning, Hebbian coincidence learning, Hopfield networks and attractor networks:
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 474–505)
 Feedforward neural networks, perceptrons and radial basis networks:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 739–748, 758)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 458–467)
 Schulz & Behnke (2012).
 Deep learning:
Goodfellow, Bengio & Courville (2016)
Hinton et al. (2016)
Schmidhuber (2015)
 Deng & Yu (2014), pp. 199–200.
 Ciresan, Meier & Schmidhuber (2012).
 Habibi (2017).
 Fukushima (2007).
 Recurrent neural networks, Hopfield nets:
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 758)
Luger & Stubblefield (2004, pp. 474–505)
Schmidhuber (2015)
 Schmidhuber (2015).
 Werbos (1988); Robinson & Fallside (1987); Williams & Zipser (1994)
 Goodfellow, Bengio & Courville (2016); Hochreiter (1991)
 Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997); Gers, Schraudolph & Schraudolph (2002)
 Russell & Norvig (2009), p. 1.
 European Commission (2020), p. 1.
 CNN (2006).
 Targeted advertising:
Russell & Norvig (2009, p. 1)
Economist (2016)
Lohr (2016)
 Lohr (2016).
 Smith (2016).
 Rowinski (2013).
 Frangoul (2019).
 Brown (2019).
 McCorduck (2004), pp. 480–483.
 Markoff (2011).
 Google (2016); BBC (2016)
 Solly (2019).
 Bowling et al. (2015).
 Sample (2017).
 Anadiotis (2020).
 Heath (2020).
 Aletras et al. (2016).
 "Going Nowhere Fast? Smart Traffic Lights Can Help Ease Gridlock". 18 May 2022.
 "Intellectual Property and Frontier Technologies". WIPO.
 "WIPO Technology Trends 2019 – Artificial Intelligence" (PDF). WIPO. 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
 Turing (1950), p. 1.
 Turing's original publication of the Turing test in "Computing machinery and intelligence":
Turing (1950)
Historical influence and philosophical implications:
Haugeland (1985, pp. 6–9)
Crevier (1993, p. 24)
McCorduck (2004, pp. 70–71)
Russell & Norvig (2021, pp. 2 and 984)
 Turing (1950), Under "The Argument from Consciousness".
 Russell & Norvig (2021), chpt. 2.
 Russell & Norvig (2021), p. 3.
 Maker (2006).
 McCarthy 1999.
 Minsky (1986).
 "Artificial intelligence - Google Search". www.google.com. Retrieved 5 November 2022.
 Nilsson (1983), p. 10.
 Haugeland (1985), pp. 112–117.
 Physical symbol system hypothesis:
Newell & Simon (1976, p. 116)
Historical significance:
McCorduck (2004, p. 153)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 18)
 Moravec's paradox:
Moravec (1988, pp. 15–16)
Minsky (1986, p. 29)
Pinker (2007, pp. 190–91)
 Dreyfus' critique of AI:
Dreyfus (1972)
Dreyfus & Dreyfus (1986)
Historical significance and philosophical implications:
Crevier (1993, pp. 120–132)
McCorduck (2004, pp. 211–239)
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 950–952)
Fearn (2007, Chpt. 3)
 Crevier (1993), p. 125.
 Langley (2011).
 Katz (2012).
 Neats vs. scruffies, the historic debate:
McCorduck (2004, pp. 421–424, 486–489)
Crevier (1993, p. 168)
Nilsson (1983, pp. 10–11)
A classic example of the "scruffy" approach to intelligence:
Minsky (1986)
A modern example of neat AI and its aspirations:
Domingos (2015)
 Russell & Norvig (2003), pp. 25–26.
 Pennachin & Goertzel (2007).
 Roberts (2016).
 Russell & Norvig (2003), p. 947.
 Chalmers (1995).
 Dennett (1991).
 Horst (2005).
 Searle (1999).
 Searle (1980), p. 1.
 Searle's Chinese room argument:
Searle (1980). Searle's original presentation of the thought experiment.
Searle (1999).
Discussion:
Russell & Norvig (2003, pp. 958–960)
McCorduck (2004, pp. 443–445)
Crevier (1993, pp. 269–271)
 Robot rights:
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 964)
BBC (2006)
Maschafilm (2010) (the film Plug & Pray)
 Evans (2015).
 McCorduck (2004), pp. 19–25.
 Henderson (2007).
 Omohundro (2008).
 Vinge (1993).
 Russell & Norvig (2003), p. 963.
 Transhumanism:
Moravec (1988)
Kurzweil (2005)
Russell & Norvig (2003, p. 963)
 AI as evolution:
Edward Fredkin is quoted in McCorduck (2004, p. 401)
Butler (1863)
Dyson (1998)
 Ford & Colvin (2015); McGaughey (2018)
 IGM Chicago (2017).
 Arntz, Gregory & Zierahn (2016), p. 33.
 Lohr (2017); Frey & Osborne (2017); Arntz, Gregory & Zierahn (2016, p. 33)
 Morgenstern (2015).
 Mahdawi (2017); Thompson (2014)
 Harari (2018).
 Weaponized AI:
Robitzski (2018)
Sainato (2015)
 Urbina, Fabio; Lentzos, Filippa; Invernizzi, Cédric; Ekins, Sean (7 March 2022). "Dual use of artificial-intelligence-powered drug discovery". Nature Machine Intelligence. 4 (3): 189–191. doi:10.1038/s42256-022-00465-9. PMC 9544280. PMID 36211133. S2CID 247302391. Retrieved 15 March 2022.
 CNA (2019).
 Goffrey (2008), p. 17.
 Lipartito (2011, p. 36); Goodman & Flaxman (2017, p. 6)
 Larson & Angwin (2016).
 Dockrill, Peter, Robots With Flawed AI Make Sexist And Racist Decisions, Experiment Shows, Science Alert, 27 June 2022
 Cellan-Jones (2014).
 Bostrom (2014); Müller & Bostrom (2014); Bostrom (2015)
 Rubin (2003).
 Müller & Bostrom (2014).
 Leaders' concerns about the existential risks of AI:
Rawlinson (2015)
Holley (2015)
Gibbs (2014)
Churm (2019)
Sainato (2015)
 Funding to mitigate risks of AI:
Post (2015)
Del Prado (2015)
Clark (2015a)
FastCompany (2015)
 Leaders who argue the benefits of AI outweigh the risks:
Thibodeau (2019)
Bhardwaj (2018)
 Arguments that AI is not an imminent risk:
Brooks (2014)
Geist (2015)
Madrigal (2015)
Lee (2014)
 Brooks (2014).
 "Artificial intelligence and copyright". www.wipo.int. Retrieved 27 May 2022.
 Yudkowsky (2008).
 Anderson & Anderson (2011).
 AAAI (2014).
 Wallach (2010).
 Russell (2019), p. 173.
 Regulation of AI to mitigate risks:
Berryhill et al. (2019)
Barfield & Pagallo (2018)
Iphofen & Kritikos (2019)
Wirtz, Weyerer & Geyer (2018)
Buiten (2019)
 Law Library of Congress (U.S.). Global Legal Research Directorate (2019).
 Kissinger, Henry (1 November 2021). "The Challenge of Being Human in the Age of AI". The Wall Street Journal.
 Buttazzo (2001).
 Anderson (2008).
 McCauley (2007).
 Galvan (1997).
AI textbooks
These were the four the most widely used AI textbooks in 2008:

Luger, George; Stubblefield, William (2004). Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem Solving (5th ed.). Benjamin/Cummings. ISBN 978-0-8053-4780-7. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2019.
Nilsson, Nils (1998). Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN 978-1-55860-467-4. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter (2003), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (2nd ed.), Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-790395-2.
Poole, David; Mackworth, Alan; Goebel, Randy (1998). Computational Intelligence: A Logical Approach. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-510270-3. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Later editions.

Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter (2009). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-604259-4..
Poole, David; Mackworth, Alan (2017). Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-19539-4.
The two most widely used textbooks in 2021.Open Syllabus: Explorer

Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Hoboken: Pearson. ISBN 9780134610993. LCCN 20190474.
Knight, Kevin; Rich, Elaine (1 January 2010). Artificial Intelligence (3rd ed.). Mc Graw Hill India. ISBN 9780070087705.
History of AI
Crevier, Daniel (1993). AI: The Tumultuous Search for Artificial Intelligence. New York, NY: BasicBooks. ISBN 0-465-02997-3..
McCorduck, Pamela (2004), Machines Who Think (2nd ed.), Natick, MA: A. K. Peters, Ltd., ISBN 1-56881-205-1.
Newquist, HP (1994). The Brain Makers: Genius, Ego, And Greed In The Quest For Machines That Think. New York: Macmillan/SAMS. ISBN 978-0-672-30412-5.
Nilsson, Nils (2009). The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-12293-1.
Other sources
McCarthy, John (1999), What is AI?
Werbos, P. J. (1988), "Generalization of backpropagation with application to a recurrent gas market model", Neural Networks, 1 (4): 339–356, doi:10.1016/0893-6080(88)90007-X
Gers, Felix A.; Schraudolph, Nicol N.; Schraudolph, Jürgen (2002). "Learning Precise Timing with LSTM Recurrent Networks" (PDF). Journal of Machine Learning Research. 3: 115–143. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
Deng, L.; Yu, D. (2014). "Deep Learning: Methods and Applications" (PDF). Foundations and Trends in Signal Processing. 7 (3–4): 1–199. doi:10.1561/2000000039. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 18 October 2014.
Schulz, Hannes; Behnke, Sven (1 November 2012). "Deep Learning". KI – Künstliche Intelligenz. 26 (4): 357–363. doi:10.1007/s13218-012-0198-z. ISSN 1610-1987. S2CID 220523562.
Fukushima, K. (2007). "Neocognitron". Scholarpedia. 2 (1): 1717. Bibcode:2007SchpJ...2.1717F. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.1717. was introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1980.
Habibi, Aghdam, Hamed (30 May 2017). Guide to convolutional neural networks : a practical application to traffic-sign detection and classification. Heravi, Elnaz Jahani. Cham, Switzerland. ISBN 9783319575490. OCLC 987790957.
Ciresan, D.; Meier, U.; Schmidhuber, J. (2012). "Multi-column deep neural networks for image classification". 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3642–3649. arXiv:1202.2745. doi:10.1109/cvpr.2012.6248110. ISBN 978-1-4673-1228-8. S2CID 2161592.
"From not working to neural networking". The Economist. 2016. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2018.
Thompson, Derek (23 January 2014). "What Jobs Will the Robots Take?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018.
Scassellati, Brian (2002). "Theory of mind for a humanoid robot". Autonomous Robots. 12 (1): 13–24. doi:10.1023/A:1013298507114. S2CID 1979315.
Sample, Ian (14 March 2017). "Google's DeepMind makes AI program that can learn like a human". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 26 April 2018.
Heath, Nick (11 December 2020). "What is AI? Everything you need to know about Artificial Intelligence". ZDNet. Retrieved 1 March 2021.
Bowling, Michael; Burch, Neil; Johanson, Michael; Tammelin, Oskari (9 January 2015). "Heads-up limit hold'em poker is solved". Science. 347 (6218): 145–149. Bibcode:2015Sci...347..145B. doi:10.1126/science.1259433. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 25574016. S2CID 3796371.
Solly, Meilan (15 July 2019). "This Poker-Playing A.I. Knows When to Hold 'Em and When to Fold 'Em". Smithsonian.
"Artificial intelligence: Google's AlphaGo beats Go master Lee Se-dol". BBC News. 12 March 2016. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
Rowinski, Dan (15 January 2013). "Virtual Personal Assistants & The Future Of Your Smartphone [Infographic]". ReadWrite. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015.
Manyika, James (2022). "Getting AI Right: Introductory Notes on AI & Society". Daedalus. 151 (2): 5–27. doi:10.1162/daed_e_01897. S2CID 248377878. Retrieved 5 May 2022.
Markoff, John (16 February 2011). "Computer Wins on 'Jeopardy!': Trivial, It's Not". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
Anadiotis, George (1 October 2020). "The state of AI in 2020: Democratization, industrialization, and the way to artificial general intelligence". ZDNet. Retrieved 1 March 2021.
Goertzel, Ben; Lian, Ruiting; Arel, Itamar; de Garis, Hugo; Chen, Shuo (December 2010). "A world survey of artificial brain projects, Part II: Biologically inspired cognitive architectures". Neurocomputing. 74 (1–3): 30–49. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2010.08.012.
Robinson, A. J.; Fallside, F. (1987), "The utility driven dynamic error propagation network.", Technical Report CUED/F-INFENG/TR.1, Cambridge University Engineering Department
Hochreiter, Sepp (1991). Untersuchungen zu dynamischen neuronalen Netzen (PDF) (diploma thesis). Munich: Institut f. Informatik, Technische Univ. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 March 2015. Retrieved 16 April 2016.
Williams, R. J.; Zipser, D. (1994), "Gradient-based learning algorithms for recurrent networks and their computational complexity", Back-propagation: Theory, Architectures and Applications, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Hochreiter, Sepp; Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997), "Long Short-Term Memory", Neural Computation, 9 (8): 1735–1780, doi:10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735, PMID 9377276, S2CID 1915014
Goodfellow, Ian; Bengio, Yoshua; Courville, Aaron (2016), Deep Learning, MIT Press., archived from the original on 16 April 2016, retrieved 12 November 2017
Hinton, G.; Deng, L.; Yu, D.; Dahl, G.; Mohamed, A.; Jaitly, N.; Senior, A.; Vanhoucke, V.; Nguyen, P.; Sainath, T.; Kingsbury, B. (2012). "Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition – The shared views of four research groups". IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 29 (6): 82–97. Bibcode:2012ISPM...29...82H. doi:10.1109/msp.2012.2205597. S2CID 206485943.
Schmidhuber, J. (2015). "Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview". Neural Networks. 61: 85–117. arXiv:1404.7828. doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2014.09.003. PMID 25462637. S2CID 11715509.
Linnainmaa, Seppo (1970). The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of the local rounding errors (Thesis) (in Finnish). Univ. Helsinki, 6–7.|
Griewank, Andreas (2012). "Who Invented the Reverse Mode of Differentiation? Optimization Stories". Documenta Matematica, Extra Volume ISMP: 389–400.
Werbos, Paul (1974). Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences (Ph.D. thesis). Harvard University.
Werbos, Paul (1982). "Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences" (PDF). System Modeling and Optimization. Applications of advances in nonlinear sensitivity analysis. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2016.
"What is 'fuzzy logic'? Are there computers that are inherently fuzzy and do not apply the usual binary logic?". Scientific American. 21 October 1999. Retrieved 5 May 2018.
Merkle, Daniel; Middendorf, Martin (2013). "Swarm Intelligence". In Burke, Edmund K.; Kendall, Graham (eds.). Search Methodologies: Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-1-4614-6940-7.
van der Walt, Christiaan; Bernard, Etienne (2006). "Data characteristics that determine classifier performance" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 5 August 2009.
Hutter, Marcus (2005). Universal Artificial Intelligence. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-22139-5.
Howe, J. (November 1994). "Artificial Intelligence at Edinburgh University: a Perspective". Archived from the original on 15 May 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Galvan, Jill (1 January 1997). "Entering the Posthuman Collective in Philip K. Dick's "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"". Science Fiction Studies. 24 (3): 413–429. JSTOR 4240644.
McCauley, Lee (2007). "AI armageddon and the three laws of robotics". Ethics and Information Technology. 9 (2): 153–164. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.85.8904. doi:10.1007/s10676-007-9138-2. S2CID 37272949.
Buttazzo, G. (July 2001). "Artificial consciousness: Utopia or real possibility?". Computer. 34 (7): 24–30. doi:10.1109/2.933500.
Anderson, Susan Leigh (2008). "Asimov's "three laws of robotics" and machine metaethics". AI & Society. 22 (4): 477–493. doi:10.1007/s00146-007-0094-5. S2CID 1809459.
Yudkowsky, E (2008), "Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk" (PDF), Global Catastrophic Risks, Oxford University Press, 2008, Bibcode:2008gcr..book..303Y
McGaughey, E (2018), Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy, p. SSRN part 2(3), SSRN 3044448, archived from the original on 24 May 2018, retrieved 12 January 2018
IGM Chicago (30 June 2017). "Robots and Artificial Intelligence". www.igmchicago.org. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019.
Lohr, Steve (2017). "Robots Will Take Jobs, but Not as Fast as Some Fear, New Report Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 January 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
Frey, Carl Benedikt; Osborne, Michael A (1 January 2017). "The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation?". Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 114: 254–280. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.395.416. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.019. ISSN 0040-1625.
Arntz, Melanie; Gregory, Terry; Zierahn, Ulrich (2016), "The risk of automation for jobs in OECD countries: A comparative analysis", OECD Social, Employment, and Migration Working Papers 189
Morgenstern, Michael (9 May 2015). "Automation and anxiety". The Economist. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
Mahdawi, Arwa (26 June 2017). "What jobs will still be around in 20 years? Read this to prepare your future". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
Rubin, Charles (Spring 2003). "Artificial Intelligence and Human Nature". The New Atlantis. 1: 88–100. Archived from the original on 11 June 2012.
Bostrom, Nick (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford University Press.
Brooks, Rodney (10 November 2014). "artificial intelligence is a tool, not a threat". Archived from the original on 12 November 2014.
Sainato, Michael (19 August 2015). "Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, and Bill Gates Warn About Artificial Intelligence". Observer. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Harari, Yuval Noah (October 2018). "Why Technology Favors Tyranny". The Atlantic.
Robitzski, Dan (5 September 2018). "Five experts share what scares them the most about AI". Archived from the original on 8 December 2019. Retrieved 8 December 2019.
Goffrey, Andrew (2008). "Algorithm". In Fuller, Matthew (ed.). Software studies: a lexicon. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. pp. 15–20. ISBN 978-1-4356-4787-9.
Lipartito, Kenneth (6 January 2011), The Narrative and the Algorithm: Genres of Credit Reporting from the Nineteenth Century to Today (PDF) (Unpublished manuscript), doi:10.2139/ssrn.1736283, S2CID 166742927, archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022
Goodman, Bryce; Flaxman, Seth (2017). "EU regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a "right to explanation"". AI Magazine. 38 (3): 50. arXiv:1606.08813. doi:10.1609/aimag.v38i3.2741. S2CID 7373959.
CNA (12 January 2019). "Commentary: Bad news. Artificial intelligence is biased". CNA. Archived from the original on 12 January 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2020.
Larson, Jeff; Angwin, Julia (23 May 2016). "How We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm". ProPublica. Archived from the original on 29 April 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2020.
Müller, Vincent C.; Bostrom, Nick (2014). "Future Progress in Artificial Intelligence: A Poll Among Experts" (PDF). AI Matters. 1 (1): 9–11. doi:10.1145/2639475.2639478. S2CID 8510016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 January 2016.
Cellan-Jones, Rory (2 December 2014). "Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end mankind". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Rawlinson, Kevin (29 January 2015). "Microsoft's Bill Gates insists AI is a threat". BBC News. Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015.
Holley, Peter (28 January 2015). "Bill Gates on dangers of artificial intelligence: 'I don't understand why some people are not concerned'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Gibbs, Samuel (27 October 2014). "Elon Musk: artificial intelligence is our biggest existential threat". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Churm, Philip Andrew (14 May 2019). "Yuval Noah Harari talks politics, technology and migration". euronews. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 15 November 2020.
Bostrom, Nick (2015). "What happens when our computers get smarter than we are?". TED (conference). Archived from the original on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 30 January 2020.
Post, Washington (2015). "Tech titans like Elon Musk are spending $1 billion to save you from terminators". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 7 June 2016.
Del Prado, Guia Marie (9 October 2015). "The mysterious artificial intelligence company Elon Musk invested in is developing game-changing smart computers". Tech Insider. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
FastCompany (15 January 2015). "Elon Musk Is Donating $10M Of His Own Money To Artificial Intelligence Research". Fast Company. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Thibodeau, Patrick (25 March 2019). "Oracle CEO Mark Hurd sees no reason to fear ERP AI". SearchERP. Archived from the original on 6 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019.
Bhardwaj, Prachi (24 May 2018). "Mark Zuckerberg responds to Elon Musk's paranoia about AI: 'AI is going to... help keep our communities safe.'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 6 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019.
Geist, Edward Moore (9 August 2015). "Is artificial intelligence really an existential threat to humanity?". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Madrigal, Alexis C. (27 February 2015). "The case against killer robots, from a guy actually working on artificial intelligence". Fusion.net. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2016.
Lee, Timothy B. (22 August 2014). "Will artificial intelligence destroy humanity? Here are 5 reasons not to worry". Vox. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Law Library of Congress (U.S.). Global Legal Research Directorate, issuing body. (2019). Regulation of artificial intelligence in selected jurisdictions. LCCN 2019668143. OCLC 1110727808.
Berryhill, Jamie; Heang, Kévin Kok; Clogher, Rob; McBride, Keegan (2019). Hello, World: Artificial Intelligence and its Use in the Public Sector (PDF). Paris: OECD Observatory of Public Sector Innovation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2020.
Barfield, Woodrow; Pagallo, Ugo (2018). Research handbook on the law of artificial intelligence. Cheltenham, UK. ISBN 978-1-78643-904-8. OCLC 1039480085.
Iphofen, Ron; Kritikos, Mihalis (3 January 2019). "Regulating artificial intelligence and robotics: ethics by design in a digital society". Contemporary Social Science. 16 (2): 170–184. doi:10.1080/21582041.2018.1563803. ISSN 2158-2041. S2CID 59298502.
Wirtz, Bernd W.; Weyerer, Jan C.; Geyer, Carolin (24 July 2018). "Artificial Intelligence and the Public Sector – Applications and Challenges". International Journal of Public Administration. 42 (7): 596–615. doi:10.1080/01900692.2018.1498103. ISSN 0190-0692. S2CID 158829602. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Buiten, Miriam C (2019). "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial Intelligence". European Journal of Risk Regulation. 10 (1): 41–59. doi:10.1017/err.2019.8. ISSN 1867-299X.
Wallach, Wendell (2010). Moral Machines. Oxford University Press.
Brown, Eileen (5 November 2019). "Half of Americans do not believe deepfake news could target them online". ZDNet. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
Frangoul, Anmar (14 June 2019). "A Californian business is using A.I. to change the way we think about energy storage". CNBC. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 5 November 2019.
"The Economist Explains: Why firms are piling into artificial intelligence". The Economist. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016.
Lohr, Steve (28 February 2016). "The Promise of Artificial Intelligence Unfolds in Small Steps". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 February 2016. Retrieved 29 February 2016.
Smith, Mark (22 July 2016). "So you think you chose to read this article?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 July 2016.
Aletras, N.; Tsarapatsanis, D.; Preotiuc-Pietro, D.; Lampos, V. (2016). "Predicting judicial decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: a Natural Language Processing perspective". PeerJ Computer Science. 2: e93. doi:10.7717/peerj-cs.93.
Cadena, Cesar; Carlone, Luca; Carrillo, Henry; Latif, Yasir; Scaramuzza, Davide; Neira, Jose; Reid, Ian; Leonard, John J. (December 2016). "Past, Present, and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Toward the Robust-Perception Age". IEEE Transactions on Robotics. 32 (6): 1309–1332. arXiv:1606.05830. doi:10.1109/TRO.2016.2624754. S2CID 2596787.
Cambria, Erik; White, Bebo (May 2014). "Jumping NLP Curves: A Review of Natural Language Processing Research [Review Article]". IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine. 9 (2): 48–57. doi:10.1109/MCI.2014.2307227. S2CID 206451986.
Vincent, James (7 November 2019). "OpenAI has published the text-generating AI it said was too dangerous to share". The Verge. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 11 June 2020.
Jordan, M. I.; Mitchell, T. M. (16 July 2015). "Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects". Science. 349 (6245): 255–260. Bibcode:2015Sci...349..255J. doi:10.1126/science.aaa8415. PMID 26185243. S2CID 677218.
Maschafilm (2010). "Content: Plug & Pray Film – Artificial Intelligence – Robots -". plugandpray-film.de. Archived from the original on 12 February 2016.
Evans, Woody (2015). "Posthuman Rights: Dimensions of Transhuman Worlds". Teknokultura. 12 (2). doi:10.5209/rev_TK.2015.v12.n2.49072.
Waddell, Kaveh (2018). "Chatbots Have Entered the Uncanny Valley". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018.
Poria, Soujanya; Cambria, Erik; Bajpai, Rajiv; Hussain, Amir (September 2017). "A review of affective computing: From unimodal analysis to multimodal fusion". Information Fusion. 37: 98–125. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2017.02.003. hdl:1893/25490.
"Robots could demand legal rights". BBC News. 21 December 2006. Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
Horst, Steven (2005). "The Computational Theory of Mind". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Omohundro, Steve (2008). The Nature of Self-Improving Artificial Intelligence. presented and distributed at the 2007 Singularity Summit, San Francisco, CA.
Ford, Martin; Colvin, Geoff (6 September 2015). "Will robots create more jobs than they destroy?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
White Paper: On Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust (PDF). Brussels: European Commission. 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 February 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020.
Anderson, Michael; Anderson, Susan Leigh (2011). Machine Ethics. Cambridge University Press.
"Machine Ethics". aaai.org. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014.
Russell, Stuart (8 October 2019). Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control. United States: Viking. ISBN 978-0-525-55861-3. OCLC 1083694322.
"AI set to exceed human brain power". CNN. 9 August 2006. Archived from the original on 19 February 2008.
"Robots could demand legal rights". BBC News. 21 December 2006. Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
"Kismet". MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Humanoid Robotics Group. Archived from the original on 17 October 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
Smoliar, Stephen W.; Zhang, HongJiang (1994). "Content based video indexing and retrieval". IEEE MultiMedia. 1 (2): 62–72. doi:10.1109/93.311653. S2CID 32710913.
Neumann, Bernd; Möller, Ralf (January 2008). "On scene interpretation with description logics". Image and Vision Computing. 26 (1): 82–101. doi:10.1016/j.imavis.2007.08.013.
Kuperman, G. J.; Reichley, R. M.; Bailey, T. C. (1 July 2006). "Using Commercial Knowledge Bases for Clinical Decision Support: Opportunities, Hurdles, and Recommendations". Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 13 (4): 369–371. doi:10.1197/jamia.M2055. PMC 1513681. PMID 16622160.
McGarry, Ken (1 December 2005). "A survey of interestingness measures for knowledge discovery". The Knowledge Engineering Review. 20 (1): 39–61. doi:10.1017/S0269888905000408. S2CID 14987656.
Bertini, M; Del Bimbo, A; Torniai, C (2006). "Automatic annotation and semantic retrieval of video sequences using multimedia ontologies". MM '06 Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Multimedia. 14th ACM international conference on Multimedia. Santa Barbara: ACM. pp. 679–682.
Kahneman, Daniel (25 October 2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4299-6935-2. Retrieved 8 April 2012.
Turing, Alan (1948), "Machine Intelligence", in Copeland, B. Jack (ed.), The Essential Turing: The ideas that gave birth to the computer age, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 412, ISBN 978-0-19-825080-7
Domingos, Pedro (22 September 2015). The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0465065707.
Minsky, Marvin (1986), The Society of Mind, Simon and Schuster
Pinker, Steven (4 September 2007) [1994], The Language Instinct, Perennial Modern Classics, Harper, ISBN 978-0-06-133646-1
Chalmers, David (1995). "Facing up to the problem of consciousness". Journal of Consciousness Studies. 2 (3): 200–219. Archived from the original on 8 March 2005. Retrieved 11 October 2018.
Roberts, Jacob (2016). "Thinking Machines: The Search for Artificial Intelligence". Distillations. Vol. 2, no. 2. pp. 14–23. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2018.
Pennachin, C.; Goertzel, B. (2007). "Contemporary Approaches to Artificial General Intelligence". Artificial General Intelligence. Cognitive Technologies. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-68677-4_1. ISBN 978-3-540-23733-4.
"Ask the AI experts: What's driving today's progress in AI?". McKinsey & Company. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2018.
Ransbotham, Sam; Kiron, David; Gerbert, Philipp; Reeves, Martin (6 September 2017). "Reshaping Business With Artificial Intelligence". MIT Sloan Management Review. Archived from the original on 19 May 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2018.
Lorica, Ben (18 December 2017). "The state of AI adoption". O'Reilly Media. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2018.
"AlphaGo – Google DeepMind". Archived from the original on 20 October 2021.
Asada, M.; Hosoda, K.; Kuniyoshi, Y.; Ishiguro, H.; Inui, T.; Yoshikawa, Y.; Ogino, M.; Yoshida, C. (2009). "Cognitive developmental robotics: a survey". IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development. 1 (1): 12–34. doi:10.1109/tamd.2009.2021702. S2CID 10168773.
Ashok83 (10 September 2019). "How AI Is Getting Groundbreaking Changes In Talent Management And HR Tech". Hackernoon. Archived from the original on 11 September 2019. Retrieved 14 February 2020.
Berlinski, David (2000). The Advent of the Algorithm. Harcourt Books. ISBN 978-0-15-601391-8. OCLC 46890682. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Brooks, Rodney (1990). "Elephants Don't Play Chess" (PDF). Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 6 (1–2): 3–15. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.588.7539. doi:10.1016/S0921-8890(05)80025-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 August 2007.
Butler, Samuel (13 June 1863). "Darwin among the Machines". Letters to the Editor. The Press. Christchurch, New Zealand. Archived from the original on 19 September 2008. Retrieved 16 October 2014 – via Victoria University of Wellington.
Clark, Jack (2015a). "Musk-Backed Group Probes Risks Behind Artificial Intelligence". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
Clark, Jack (2015b). "Why 2015 Was a Breakthrough Year in Artificial Intelligence". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016. Retrieved 23 November 2016.
Dennett, Daniel (1991). Consciousness Explained. The Penguin Press. ISBN 978-0-7139-9037-9.
Dreyfus, Hubert (1972). What Computers Can't Do. New York: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-06-011082-6.
Dreyfus, Hubert; Dreyfus, Stuart (1986). Mind over Machine: The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-02-908060-3. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Dyson, George (1998). Darwin among the Machines. Allan Lane Science. ISBN 978-0-7382-0030-9. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Edelson, Edward (1991). The Nervous System. New York: Chelsea House. ISBN 978-0-7910-0464-7. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
Fearn, Nicholas (2007). The Latest Answers to the Oldest Questions: A Philosophical Adventure with the World's Greatest Thinkers. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-1839-4.
Haugeland, John (1985). Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-08153-5.
Hawkins, Jeff; Blakeslee, Sandra (2005). On Intelligence. New York: Owl Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-7853-4.
Henderson, Mark (24 April 2007). "Human rights for robots? We're getting carried away". The Times Online. London. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2014.
Kahneman, Daniel; Slovic, D.; Tversky, Amos (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science. Vol. 185. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1124–1131. Bibcode:1974Sci...185.1124T. doi:10.1126/science.185.4157.1124. ISBN 978-0-521-28414-1. PMID 17835457. S2CID 143452957.
Katz, Yarden (1 November 2012). "Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went Wrong". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 28 February 2019. Retrieved 26 October 2014.
Kurzweil, Ray (2005). The Singularity is Near. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-670-03384-3.
Langley, Pat (2011). "The changing science of machine learning". Machine Learning. 82 (3): 275–279. doi:10.1007/s10994-011-5242-y.
Legg, Shane; Hutter, Marcus (15 June 2007). "A Collection of Definitions of Intelligence". arXiv:0706.3639 [cs.AI].
Lenat, Douglas; Guha, R. V. (1989). Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-201-51752-1.
Lighthill, James (1973). "Artificial Intelligence: A General Survey". Artificial Intelligence: a paper symposium. Science Research Council.
Lombardo, P; Boehm, I; Nairz, K (2020). "RadioComics – Santa Claus and the future of radiology". Eur J Radiol. 122 (1): 108771. doi:10.1016/j.ejrad.2019.108771. PMID 31835078.
Lungarella, M.; Metta, G.; Pfeifer, R.; Sandini, G. (2003). "Developmental robotics: a survey". Connection Science. 15 (4): 151–190. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.83.7615. doi:10.1080/09540090310001655110. S2CID 1452734.
Maker, Meg Houston (2006). "AI@50: AI Past, Present, Future". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007. Retrieved 16 October 2008.
McCarthy, John; Minsky, Marvin; Rochester, Nathan; Shannon, Claude (1955). "A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence". Archived from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Minsky, Marvin (1967). Computation: Finite and Infinite Machines. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-165449-5. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
Moravec, Hans (1988). Mind Children. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-57616-2. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
NRC (United States National Research Council) (1999). "Developments in Artificial Intelligence". Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research. National Academy Press.
Newell, Allen; Simon, H. A. (1976). "Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry: Symbols and Search". Communications of the ACM. 19 (3): 113–126. doi:10.1145/360018.360022..
Nilsson, Nils (1983). "Artificial Intelligence Prepares for 2001" (PDF). AI Magazine. 1 (1). Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 August 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. Presidential Address to the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.
Oudeyer, P-Y. (2010). "On the impact of robotics in behavioral and cognitive sciences: from insect navigation to human cognitive development" (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development. 2 (1): 2–16. doi:10.1109/tamd.2009.2039057. S2CID 6362217. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 4 June 2013.
Schank, Roger C. (1991). "Where's the AI". AI magazine. Vol. 12, no. 4.
Searle, John (1980). "Minds, Brains and Programs" (PDF). Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 3 (3): 417–457. doi:10.1017/S0140525X00005756. S2CID 55303721. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Searle, John (1999). Mind, language and society. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04521-1. OCLC 231867665. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Simon, H. A. (1965). The Shape of Automation for Men and Management. New York: Harper & Row. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
Solomonoff, Ray (1956). An Inductive Inference Machine (PDF). Dartmouth Summer Research Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 April 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011 – via std.com, pdf scanned copy of the original. Later published as
Solomonoff, Ray (1957). "An Inductive Inference Machine". IRE Convention Record. Vol. Section on Information Theory, part 2. pp. 56–62.
Spadafora, Anthony (21 October 2016). "Stephen Hawking believes AI could be mankind's last accomplishment". BetaNews. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017.
Tao, Jianhua; Tan, Tieniu (2005). Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Affective Computing: A Review. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. LNCS 3784. Springer. pp. 981–995. doi:10.1007/11573548. ISBN 978-3-540-29621-8.
Tecuci, Gheorghe (March–April 2012). "Artificial Intelligence". Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics. 4 (2): 168–180. doi:10.1002/wics.200. S2CID 196141190.
Thro, Ellen (1993). Robotics: The Marriage of Computers and Machines. New York: Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-2628-9. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Turing, Alan (October 1950), "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind, LIX (236): 433–460, doi:10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433, ISSN 0026-4423.
UNESCO Science Report: the Race Against Time for Smarter Development. Paris: UNESCO. 11 June 2021. ISBN 978-92-3-100450-6.
Vinge, Vernor (1993). "The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era". Vision 21: Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace: 11. Bibcode:1993vise.nasa...11V. Archived from the original on 1 January 2007. Retrieved 14 November 2011.
Wason, P. C.; Shapiro, D. (1966). "Reasoning". In Foss, B. M. (ed.). New horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
Weng, J.; McClelland; Pentland, A.; Sporns, O.; Stockman, I.; Sur, M.; Thelen, E. (2001). "Autonomous mental development by robots and animals" (PDF). Science. 291 (5504): 599–600. doi:10.1126/science.291.5504.599. PMID 11229402. S2CID 54131797. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 September 2013. Retrieved 4 June 2013 – via msu.edu.
Further reading
Autor, David H., "Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace Automation" (2015) 29(3) Journal of Economic Perspectives 3.
Boden, Margaret, Mind As Machine, Oxford University Press, 2006.
Cukier, Kenneth, "Ready for Robots? How to Think about the Future of AI", Foreign Affairs, vol. 98, no. 4 (July/August 2019), pp. 192–98. George Dyson, historian of computing, writes (in what might be called "Dyson's Law") that "Any system simple enough to be understandable will not be complicated enough to behave intelligently, while any system complicated enough to behave intelligently will be too complicated to understand." (p. 197.) Computer scientist Alex Pentland writes: "Current AI machine-learning algorithms are, at their core, dead simple stupid. They work, but they work by brute force." (p. 198.)
Domingos, Pedro, "Our Digital Doubles: AI will serve our species, not control it", Scientific American, vol. 319, no. 3 (September 2018), pp. 88–93.
Gopnik, Alison, "Making AI More Human: Artificial intelligence has staged a revival by starting to incorporate what we know about how children learn", Scientific American, vol. 316, no. 6 (June 2017), pp. 60–65.
Halpern, Sue, "The Human Costs of AI" (review of Kate Crawford, Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence, Yale University Press, 2021, 327 pp.; Simon Chesterman, We, the Robots?: Regulating Artificial Intelligence and the Limits of the Law, Cambridge University Press, 2021, 289 pp.; Keven Roose, Futureproof: 9 Rules for Humans in the Age of Automation, Random House, 217 pp.; Erik J. Larson, The Myth of Artificial Intelligence: Why Computers Can't Think the Way We Do, Belknap Press / Harvard University Press, 312 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXVIII, no. 16 (21 October 2021), pp. 29–31. "AI training models can replicate entrenched social and cultural biases. [...] Machines only know what they know from the data they have been given. [p. 30.] [A]rtificial general intelligence–machine-based intelligence that matches our own–is beyond the capacity of algorithmic machine learning... 'Your brain is one piece in a broader system which includes your body, your environment, other humans, and culture as a whole.' [E]ven machines that master the tasks they are trained to perform can't jump domains. AIVA, for example, can't drive a car even though it can write music (and wouldn't even be able to do that without Bach and Beethoven [and other composers on which AIVA is trained])." (p. 31.)
Johnston, John (2008) The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New AI, MIT Press.
Koch, Christof, "Proust among the Machines", Scientific American, vol. 321, no. 6 (December 2019), pp. 46–49. Christof Koch doubts the possibility of "intelligent" machines attaining consciousness, because "[e]ven the most sophisticated brain simulations are unlikely to produce conscious feelings." (p. 48.) According to Koch, "Whether machines can become sentient [is important] for ethical reasons. If computers experience life through their own senses, they cease to be purely a means to an end determined by their usefulness to... humans. Per GNW [the Global Neuronal Workspace theory], they turn from mere objects into subjects... with a point of view.... Once computers' cognitive abilities rival those of humanity, their impulse to push for legal and political rights will become irresistible—the right not to be deleted, not to have their memories wiped clean, not to suffer pain and degradation. The alternative, embodied by IIT [Integrated Information Theory], is that computers will remain only supersophisticated machinery, ghostlike empty shells, devoid of what we value most: the feeling of life itself." (p. 49.)
Marcus, Gary, "Am I Human?: Researchers need new ways to distinguish artificial intelligence from the natural kind", Scientific American, vol. 316, no. 3 (March 2017), pp. 58–63. A stumbling block to AI has been an incapacity for reliable disambiguation. An example is the "pronoun disambiguation problem": a machine has no way of determining to whom or what a pronoun in a sentence refers. (p. 61.)
Gary Marcus, "Artificial Confidence: Even the newest, buzziest systems of artificial general intelligence are stymmied by the same old problems", Scientific American, vol. 327, no. 4 (October 2022), pp. 42–45.
E McGaughey, 'Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy' (2018) SSRN, part 2(3) Archived 24 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine.
George Musser, "Artificial Imagination: How machines could learn creativity and common sense, among other human qualities", Scientific American, vol. 320, no. 5 (May 2019), pp. 58–63.
Myers, Courtney Boyd ed. (2009). "The AI Report" Archived 29 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Forbes June 2009
Raphael, Bertram (1976). The Thinking Computer. W.H. Freeman and Co. ISBN 978-0716707233. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
Scharre, Paul, "Killer Apps: The Real Dangers of an AI Arms Race", Foreign Affairs, vol. 98, no. 3 (May/June 2019), pp. 135–44. "Today's AI technologies are powerful but unreliable. Rules-based systems cannot deal with circumstances their programmers did not anticipate. Learning systems are limited by the data on which they were trained. AI failures have already led to tragedy. Advanced autopilot features in cars, although they perform well in some circumstances, have driven cars without warning into trucks, concrete barriers, and parked cars. In the wrong situation, AI systems go from supersmart to superdumb in an instant. When an enemy is trying to manipulate and hack an AI system, the risks are even greater." (p. 140.)
Serenko, Alexander (2010). "The development of an AI journal ranking based on the revealed preference approach" (PDF). Journal of Informetrics. 4 (4): 447–59. doi:10.1016/j.joi.2010.04.001. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 24 August 2013.
Serenko, Alexander; Michael Dohan (2011). "Comparing the expert survey and citation impact journal ranking methods: Example from the field of Artificial Intelligence" (PDF). Journal of Informetrics. 5 (4): 629–49. doi:10.1016/j.joi.2011.06.002. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2013.
Tom Simonite (29 December 2014). "2014 in Computing: Breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence". MIT Technology Review. Archived from the original on 2 January 2015.
Sun, R. & Bookman, L. (eds.), Computational Architectures: Integrating Neural and Symbolic Processes. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Needham, MA. 1994.
Taylor, Paul, "Insanely Complicated, Hopelessly Inadequate" (review of Brian Cantwell Smith, The Promise of Artificial Intelligence: Reckoning and Judgment, MIT, 2019, ISBN 978-0262043045, 157 pp.; Gary Marcus and Ernest Davis, Rebooting AI: Building Artificial Intelligence We Can Trust, Ballantine, 2019, ISBN 978-1524748258, 304 pp.; Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect, Penguin, 2019, ISBN 978-0141982410, 418 pp.), London Review of Books, vol. 43, no. 2 (21 January 2021), pp. 37–39. Paul Taylor writes (p. 39): "Perhaps there is a limit to what a computer can do without knowing that it is manipulating imperfect representations of an external reality."
Tooze, Adam, "Democracy and Its Discontents", The New York Review of Books, vol. LXVI, no. 10 (6 June 2019), pp. 52–53, 56–57. "Democracy has no clear answer for the mindless operation of bureaucratic and technological power. We may indeed be witnessing its extension in the form of artificial intelligence and robotics. Likewise, after decades of dire warning, the environmental problem remains fundamentally unaddressed.... Bureaucratic overreach and environmental catastrophe are precisely the kinds of slow-moving existential challenges that democracies deal with very badly.... Finally, there is the threat du jour: corporations and the technologies they promote." (pp. 56–57.)
External links
Artificial intelligence
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
Data from Wikidata
"Artificial Intelligence". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Thomason, Richmond. "Logic and Artificial Intelligence". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Artificial Intelligence. BBC Radio 4 discussion with John Agar, Alison Adam & Igor Aleksander (In Our Time, 8 December 2005).
artificial intelligence (AI), the ability of a digital computer or computer-controlled robot to perform tasks commonly associated with intelligent beings. The term is frequently applied to the project of developing systems endowed with the intellectual processes characteristic of humans, such as the ability to reason, discover meaning, generalize, or learn from past experience. Since the development of the digital computer in the 1940s, it has been demonstrated that computers can be programmed to carry out very complex tasks—as, for example, discovering proofs for mathematical theorems or playing chess—with great proficiency. Still, despite continuing advances in computer processing speed and memory capacity, there are as yet no programs that can match human flexibility over wider domains or in tasks requiring much everyday knowledge. On the other hand, some programs have attained the performance levels of human experts and professionals in performing certain specific tasks, so that artificial intelligence in this limited sense is found in applications as diverse as medical diagnosis, computer search engines, and voice or handwriting recognition.

What is intelligence?
All but the simplest human behaviour is ascribed to intelligence, while even the most complicated insect behaviour is never taken as an indication of intelligence. What is the difference? Consider the behaviour of the digger wasp, Sphex ichneumoneus. When the female wasp returns to her burrow with food, she first deposits it on the threshold, checks for intruders inside her burrow, and only then, if the coast is clear, carries her food inside. The real nature of the wasp’s instinctual behaviour is revealed if the food is moved a few inches away from the entrance to her burrow while she is inside: on emerging, she will repeat the whole procedure as often as the food is displaced. Intelligence—conspicuously absent in the case of Sphex—must include the ability to adapt to new circumstances.

Psychologists generally do not characterize human intelligence by just one trait but by the combination of many diverse abilities. Research in AI has focused chiefly on the following components of intelligence: learning, reasoning, problem solving, perception, and using language.

Learning
There are a number of different forms of learning as applied to artificial intelligence. The simplest is learning by trial and error. For example, a simple computer program for solving mate-in-one chess problems might try moves at random until mate is found. The program might then store the solution with the position so that the next time the computer encountered the same position it would recall the solution. This simple memorizing of individual items and procedures—known as rote learning—is relatively easy to implement on a computer. More challenging is the problem of implementing what is called generalization. Generalization involves applying past experience to analogous new situations. For example, a program that learns the past tense of regular English verbs by rote will not be able to produce the past tense of a word such as jump unless it previously had been presented with jumped, whereas a program that is able to generalize can learn the “add ed” rule and so form the past tense of jump based on experience with similar verbs.

Britannica Quiz Computers and Technology Quiz
Reasoning
To reason is to draw inferences appropriate to the situation. Inferences are classified as either deductive or inductive. An example of the former is, “Fred must be in either the museum or the café. He is not in the café; therefore he is in the museum,” and of the latter, “Previous accidents of this sort were caused by instrument failure; therefore this accident was caused by instrument failure.” The most significant difference between these forms of reasoning is that in the deductive case the truth of the premises guarantees the truth of the conclusion, whereas in the inductive case the truth of the premise lends support to the conclusion without giving absolute assurance. Inductive reasoning is common in science, where data are collected and tentative models are developed to describe and predict future behaviour—until the appearance of anomalous data forces the model to be revised. Deductive reasoning is common in mathematics and logic, where elaborate structures of irrefutable theorems are built up from a small set of basic axioms and rules.

There has been considerable success in programming computers to draw inferences, especially deductive inferences. However, true reasoning involves more than just drawing inferences; it involves drawing inferences relevant to the solution of the particular task or situation. This is one of the hardest problems confronting AI.

Problem solving
Problem solving, particularly in artificial intelligence, may be characterized as a systematic search through a range of possible actions in order to reach some predefined goal or solution. Problem-solving methods divide into special purpose and general purpose. A special-purpose method is tailor-made for a particular problem and often exploits very specific features of the situation in which the problem is embedded. In contrast, a general-purpose method is applicable to a wide variety of problems. One general-purpose technique used in AI is means-end analysis—a step-by-step, or incremental, reduction of the difference between the current state and the final goal. The program selects actions from a list of means—in the case of a simple robot this might consist of PICKUP, PUTDOWN, MOVEFORWARD, MOVEBACK, MOVELEFT, and MOVERIGHT—until the goal is reached.

Many diverse problems have been solved by artificial intelligence programs. Some examples are finding the winning move (or sequence of moves) in a board game, devising mathematical proofs, and manipulating “virtual objects” in a computer-generated world.

Perception
In perception the environment is scanned by means of various sensory organs, real or artificial, and the scene is decomposed into separate objects in various spatial relationships. Analysis is complicated by the fact that an object may appear different depending on the angle from which it is viewed, the direction and intensity of illumination in the scene, and how much the object contrasts with the surrounding field.

At present, artificial perception is sufficiently well advanced to enable optical sensors to identify individuals, autonomous vehicles to drive at moderate speeds on the open road, and robots to roam through buildings collecting empty soda cans. One of the earliest systems to integrate perception and action was FREDDY, a stationary robot with a moving television eye and a pincer hand, constructed at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, during the period 1966–73 under the direction of Donald Michie. FREDDY was able to recognize a variety of objects and could be instructed to assemble simple artifacts, such as a toy car, from a random heap of components.

Language
A language is a system of signs having meaning by convention. In this sense, language need not be confined to the spoken word. Traffic signs, for example, form a minilanguage, it being a matter of convention that ⚠ means “hazard ahead” in some countries. It is distinctive of languages that linguistic units possess meaning by convention, and linguistic meaning is very different from what is called natural meaning, exemplified in statements such as “Those clouds mean rain” and “The fall in pressure means the valve is malfunctioning.”

An important characteristic of full-fledged human languages—in contrast to birdcalls and traffic signs—is their productivity. A productive language can formulate an unlimited variety of sentences.

It is relatively easy to write computer programs that seem able, in severely restricted contexts, to respond fluently in a human language to questions and statements. Although none of these programs actually understands language, they may, in principle, reach the point where their command of a language is indistinguishable from that of a normal human. What, then, is involved in genuine understanding, if even a computer that uses language like a native human speaker is not acknowledged to understand? There is no universally agreed upon answer to this difficult question. According to one theory, whether or not one understands depends not only on one’s behaviour but also on one’s history: in order to be said to understand, one must have learned the language and have been trained to take one’s place in the linguistic community by means of interaction with other language users.

Methods and goals in AI
Symbolic vs. connectionist approaches
AI research follows two distinct, and to some extent competing, methods, the symbolic (or “top-down”) approach, and the connectionist (or “bottom-up”) approach. The top-down approach seeks to replicate intelligence by analyzing cognition independent of the biological structure of the brain, in terms of the processing of symbols—whence the symbolic label. The bottom-up approach, on the other hand, involves creating artificial neural networks in imitation of the brain’s structure—whence the connectionist label.

To illustrate the difference between these approaches, consider the task of building a system, equipped with an optical scanner, that recognizes the letters of the alphabet. A bottom-up approach typically involves training an artificial neural network by presenting letters to it one by one, gradually improving performance by “tuning” the network. (Tuning adjusts the responsiveness of different neural pathways to different stimuli.) In contrast, a top-down approach typically involves writing a computer program that compares each letter with geometric descriptions. Simply put, neural activities are the basis of the bottom-up approach, while symbolic descriptions are the basis of the top-down approach.

In The Fundamentals of Learning (1932), Edward Thorndike, a psychologist at Columbia University, New York City, first suggested that human learning consists of some unknown property of connections between neurons in the brain. In The Organization of Behavior (1949), Donald Hebb, a psychologist at McGill University, Montreal, Canada, suggested that learning specifically involves strengthening certain patterns of neural activity by increasing the probability (weight) of induced neuron firing between the associated connections. The notion of weighted connections is described in a later section, Connectionism.

In 1957 two vigorous advocates of symbolic AI—Allen Newell, a researcher at the RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California, and Herbert Simon, a psychologist and computer scientist at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania—summed up the top-down approach in what they called the physical symbol system hypothesis. This hypothesis states that processing structures of symbols is sufficient, in principle, to produce artificial intelligence in a digital computer and that, moreover, human intelligence is the result of the same type of symbolic manipulations.

Britannica Quiz Computers and Technology Quiz
During the 1950s and ’60s the top-down and bottom-up approaches were pursued simultaneously, and both achieved noteworthy, if limited, results. During the 1970s, however, bottom-up AI was neglected, and it was not until the 1980s that this approach again became prominent. Nowadays both approaches are followed, and both are acknowledged as facing difficulties. Symbolic techniques work in simplified realms but typically break down when confronted with the real world; meanwhile, bottom-up researchers have been unable to replicate the nervous systems of even the simplest living things. Caenorhabditis elegans, a much-studied worm, has approximately 300 neurons whose pattern of interconnections is perfectly known. Yet connectionist models have failed to mimic even this worm. Evidently, the neurons of connectionist theory are gross oversimplifications of the real thing.

Strong AI, applied AI, and cognitive simulation
Employing the methods outlined above, AI research attempts to reach one of three goals: strong AI, applied AI, or cognitive simulation. Strong AI aims to build machines that think. (The term strong AI was introduced for this category of research in 1980 by the philosopher John Searle of the University of California at Berkeley.) The ultimate ambition of strong AI is to produce a machine whose overall intellectual ability is indistinguishable from that of a human being. As is described in the section Early milestones in AI, this goal generated great interest in the 1950s and ’60s, but such optimism has given way to an appreciation of the extreme difficulties involved. To date, progress has been meagre. Some critics doubt whether research will produce even a system with the overall intellectual ability of an ant in the foreseeable future. Indeed, some researchers working in AI’s other two branches view strong AI as not worth pursuing.

Applied AI, also known as advanced information processing, aims to produce commercially viable “smart” systems—for example, “expert” medical diagnosis systems and stock-trading systems. Applied AI has enjoyed considerable success, as described in the section Expert systems.

In cognitive simulation, computers are used to test theories about how the human mind works—for example, theories about how people recognize faces or recall memories. Cognitive simulation is already a powerful tool in both neuroscience and cognitive psychology.

Alan Turing and the beginning of AI
Theoretical work
Alan Turing
Alan Turing
The earliest substantial work in the field of artificial intelligence was done in the mid-20th century by the British logician and computer pioneer Alan Mathison Turing. In 1935 Turing described an abstract computing machine consisting of a limitless memory and a scanner that moves back and forth through the memory, symbol by symbol, reading what it finds and writing further symbols. The actions of the scanner are dictated by a program of instructions that also is stored in the memory in the form of symbols. This is Turing’s stored-program concept, and implicit in it is the possibility of the machine operating on, and so modifying or improving, its own program. Turing’s conception is now known simply as the universal Turing machine. All modern computers are in essence universal Turing machines.

During World War II, Turing was a leading cryptanalyst at the Government Code and Cypher School in Bletchley Park, Buckinghamshire, England. Turing could not turn to the project of building a stored-program electronic computing machine until the cessation of hostilities in Europe in 1945. Nevertheless, during the war he gave considerable thought to the issue of machine intelligence. One of Turing’s colleagues at Bletchley Park, Donald Michie (who later founded the Department of Machine Intelligence and Perception at the University of Edinburgh), later recalled that Turing often discussed how computers could learn from experience as well as solve new problems through the use of guiding principles—a process now known as heuristic problem solving.

Turing gave quite possibly the earliest public lecture (London, 1947) to mention computer intelligence, saying, “What we want is a machine that can learn from experience,” and that the “possibility of letting the machine alter its own instructions provides the mechanism for this.” In 1948 he introduced many of the central concepts of AI in a report entitled “Intelligent Machinery.” However, Turing did not publish this paper, and many of his ideas were later reinvented by others. For instance, one of Turing’s original ideas was to train a network of artificial neurons to perform specific tasks, an approach described in the section Connectionism.

Chess
At Bletchley Park, Turing illustrated his ideas on machine intelligence by reference to chess—a useful source of challenging and clearly defined problems against which proposed methods for problem solving could be tested. In principle, a chess-playing computer could play by searching exhaustively through all the available moves, but in practice this is impossible because it would involve examining an astronomically large number of moves. Heuristics are necessary to guide a narrower, more discriminative search. Although Turing experimented with designing chess programs, he had to content himself with theory in the absence of a computer to run his chess program. The first true AI programs had to await the arrival of stored-program electronic digital computers.

More From Britannica chess: Chess and artificial intelligence
In 1945 Turing predicted that computers would one day play very good chess, and just over 50 years later, in 1997, Deep Blue, a chess computer built by the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), beat the reigning world champion, Garry Kasparov, in a six-game match. While Turing’s prediction came true, his expectation that chess programming would contribute to the understanding of how human beings think did not. The huge improvement in computer chess since Turing’s day is attributable to advances in computer engineering rather than advances in AI—Deep Blue’s 256 parallel processors enabled it to examine 200 million possible moves per second and to look ahead as many as 14 turns of play. Many agree with Noam Chomsky, a linguist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), who opined that a computer beating a grandmaster at chess is about as interesting as a bulldozer winning an Olympic weightlifting competition.

The Turing test
In 1950 Turing sidestepped the traditional debate concerning the definition of intelligence, introducing a practical test for computer intelligence that is now known simply as the Turing test. The Turing test involves three participants: a computer, a human interrogator, and a human foil. The interrogator attempts to determine, by asking questions of the other two participants, which is the computer. All communication is via keyboard and display screen. The interrogator may ask questions as penetrating and wide-ranging as he or she likes, and the computer is permitted to do everything possible to force a wrong identification. (For instance, the computer might answer, “No,” in response to, “Are you a computer?” and might follow a request to multiply one large number by another with a long pause and an incorrect answer.) The foil must help the interrogator to make a correct identification. A number of different people play the roles of interrogator and foil, and, if a sufficient proportion of the interrogators are unable to distinguish the computer from the human being, then (according to proponents of Turing’s test) the computer is considered an intelligent, thinking entity.

In 1991 the American philanthropist Hugh Loebner started the annual Loebner Prize competition, promising a $100,000 payout to the first computer to pass the Turing test and awarding $2,000 each year to the best effort. However, no AI program has come close to passing an undiluted Turing test. In late 2022, the advent of ChatGPT reignited conversation about the likelihood that the components of the Turing test had been met.

Early milestones in AI
The first AI programs
The earliest successful AI program was written in 1951 by Christopher Strachey, later director of the Programming Research Group at the University of Oxford. Strachey’s checkers (draughts) program ran on the Ferranti Mark I computer at the University of Manchester, England. By the summer of 1952 this program could play a complete game of checkers at a reasonable speed.

Information about the earliest successful demonstration of machine learning was published in 1952. Shopper, written by Anthony Oettinger at the University of Cambridge, ran on the EDSAC computer. Shopper’s simulated world was a mall of eight shops. When instructed to purchase an item, Shopper would search for it, visiting shops at random until the item was found. While searching, Shopper would memorize a few of the items stocked in each shop visited (just as a human shopper might). The next time Shopper was sent out for the same item, or for some other item that it had already located, it would go to the right shop straight away. This simple form of learning, as is pointed out in the introductory section What is intelligence?, is called rote learning.

The first AI program to run in the United States also was a checkers program, written in 1952 by Arthur Samuel for the prototype of the IBM 701. Samuel took over the essentials of Strachey’s checkers program and over a period of years considerably extended it. In 1955 he added features that enabled the program to learn from experience. Samuel included mechanisms for both rote learning and generalization, enhancements that eventually led to his program’s winning one game against a former Connecticut checkers champion in 1962.

Evolutionary computing
Samuel’s checkers program was also notable for being one of the first efforts at evolutionary computing. (His program “evolved” by pitting a modified copy against the current best version of his program, with the winner becoming the new standard.) Evolutionary computing typically involves the use of some automatic method of generating and evaluating successive “generations” of a program, until a highly proficient solution evolves.

A leading proponent of evolutionary computing, John Holland, also wrote test software for the prototype of the IBM 701 computer. In particular, he helped design a neural-network “virtual” rat that could be trained to navigate through a maze. This work convinced Holland of the efficacy of the bottom-up approach. While continuing to consult for IBM, Holland moved to the University of Michigan in 1952 to pursue a doctorate in mathematics. He soon switched, however, to a new interdisciplinary program in computers and information processing (later known as communications science) created by Arthur Burks, one of the builders of ENIAC and its successor EDVAC. In his 1959 dissertation, for most likely the world’s first computer science Ph.D., Holland proposed a new type of computer—a multiprocessor computer—that would assign each artificial neuron in a network to a separate processor. (In 1985 Daniel Hillis solved the engineering difficulties to build the first such computer, the 65,536-processor Thinking Machines Corporation supercomputer.)

Holland joined the faculty at Michigan after graduation and over the next four decades directed much of the research into methods of automating evolutionary computing, a process now known by the term genetic algorithms. Systems implemented in Holland’s laboratory included a chess program, models of single-cell biological organisms, and a classifier system for controlling a simulated gas-pipeline network. Genetic algorithms are no longer restricted to “academic” demonstrations, however; in one important practical application, a genetic algorithm cooperates with a witness to a crime in order to generate a portrait of the criminal.

Logical reasoning and problem solving
The ability to reason logically is an important aspect of intelligence and has always been a major focus of AI research. An important landmark in this area was a theorem-proving program written in 1955–56 by Allen Newell and J. Clifford Shaw of the RAND Corporation and Herbert Simon of the Carnegie Mellon University. The Logic Theorist, as the program became known, was designed to prove theorems from Principia Mathematica (1910–13), a three-volume work by the British philosopher-mathematicians Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell. In one instance, a proof devised by the program was more elegant than the proof given in the books.

Newell, Simon, and Shaw went on to write a more powerful program, the General Problem Solver, or GPS. The first version of GPS ran in 1957, and work continued on the project for about a decade. GPS could solve an impressive variety of puzzles using a trial and error approach. However, one criticism of GPS, and similar programs that lack any learning capability, is that the program’s intelligence is entirely secondhand, coming from whatever information the programmer explicitly includes.

English dialogue
Two of the best-known early AI programs, Eliza and Parry, gave an eerie semblance of intelligent conversation. (Details of both were first published in 1966.) Eliza, written by Joseph Weizenbaum of MIT’s AI Laboratory, simulated a human therapist. Parry, written by Stanford University psychiatrist Kenneth Colby, simulated a human paranoiac. Psychiatrists who were asked to decide whether they were communicating with Parry or a human paranoiac were often unable to tell. Nevertheless, neither Parry nor Eliza could reasonably be described as intelligent. Parry’s contributions to the conversation were canned—constructed in advance by the programmer and stored away in the computer’s memory. Eliza, too, relied on canned sentences and simple programming tricks.

AI programming languages
In the course of their work on the Logic Theorist and GPS, Newell, Simon, and Shaw developed their Information Processing Language (IPL), a computer language tailored for AI programming. At the heart of IPL was a highly flexible data structure that they called a list. A list is simply an ordered sequence of items of data. Some or all of the items in a list may themselves be lists. This scheme leads to richly branching structures.

In 1960 John McCarthy combined elements of IPL with the lambda calculus (a formal mathematical-logical system) to produce the programming language LISP (List Processor), which remains the principal language for AI work in the United States. (The lambda calculus itself was invented in 1936 by the Princeton logician Alonzo Church while he was investigating the abstract Entscheidungsproblem, or “decision problem,” for predicate logic—the same problem that Turing had been attacking when he invented the universal Turing machine.)

The logic programming language PROLOG (Programmation en Logique) was conceived by Alain Colmerauer at the University of Aix-Marseille, France, where the language was first implemented in 1973. PROLOG was further developed by the logician Robert Kowalski, a member of the AI group at the University of Edinburgh. This language makes use of a powerful theorem-proving technique known as resolution, invented in 1963 at the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission’s Argonne National Laboratory in Illinois by the British logician Alan Robinson. PROLOG can determine whether or not a given statement follows logically from other given statements. For example, given the statements “All logicians are rational” and “Robinson is a logician,” a PROLOG program responds in the affirmative to the query “Robinson is rational?” PROLOG is widely used for AI work, especially in Europe and Japan.

Researchers at the Institute for New Generation Computer Technology in Tokyo have used PROLOG as the basis for sophisticated logic programming languages. Known as fifth-generation languages, these are in use on nonnumerical parallel computers developed at the Institute.

Other recent work includes the development of languages for reasoning about time-dependent data such as “the account was paid yesterday.” These languages are based on tense logic, which permits statements to be located in the flow of time. (Tense logic was invented in 1953 by the philosopher Arthur Prior at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.)

Microworld programs
To cope with the bewildering complexity of the real world, scientists often ignore less relevant details; for instance, physicists often ignore friction and elasticity in their models. In 1970 Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert of the MIT AI Laboratory proposed that likewise AI research should focus on developing programs capable of intelligent behaviour in simpler artificial environments known as microworlds. Much research has focused on the so-called blocks world, which consists of coloured blocks of various shapes and sizes arrayed on a flat surface.

An early success of the microworld approach was SHRDLU, written by Terry Winograd of MIT. (Details of the program were published in 1972.) SHRDLU controlled a robot arm that operated above a flat surface strewn with play blocks. Both the arm and the blocks were virtual. SHRDLU would respond to commands typed in natural English, such as “Will you please stack up both of the red blocks and either a green cube or a pyramid.” The program could also answer questions about its own actions.Although SHRDLU was initially hailed as a major breakthrough, Winograd soon announced that the program was, in fact, a dead end. The techniques pioneered in the program proved unsuitable for application in wider, more interesting worlds. Moreover, the appearance that SHRDLU gave of understanding the blocks microworld, and English statements concerning it, was in fact an illusion. SHRDLU had no idea what a green block was.

Shakey
Shakey
Another product of the microworld approach was Shakey, a mobile robot developed at the Stanford Research Institute by Bertram Raphael, Nils Nilsson, and others during the period 1968–72. The robot occupied a specially built microworld consisting of walls, doorways, and a few simply shaped wooden blocks. Each wall had a carefully painted baseboard to enable the robot to “see” where the wall met the floor (a simplification of reality that is typical of the microworld approach). Shakey had about a dozen basic abilities, such as TURN, PUSH, and CLIMB-RAMP.

Critics pointed out the highly simplified nature of Shakey’s environment and emphasized that, despite these simplifications, Shakey operated excruciatingly slowly; a series of actions that a human could plan out and execute in minutes took Shakey days.

The greatest success of the microworld approach is a type of program known as an expert system, described in the next section.

Expert systems
Expert systems occupy a type of microworld—for example, a model of a ship’s hold and its cargo—that is self-contained and relatively uncomplicated. For such AI systems every effort is made to incorporate all the information about some narrow field that an expert (or group of experts) would know, so that a good expert system can often outperform any single human expert. There are many commercial expert systems, including programs for medical diagnosis, chemical analysis, credit authorization, financial management, corporate planning, financial document routing, oil and mineral prospecting, genetic engineering, automobile design and manufacture, camera lens design, computer installation design, airline scheduling, cargo placement, and automatic help services for home computer owners.

Knowledge and inference
The basic components of an expert system are a knowledge base, or KB, and an inference engine. The information to be stored in the KB is obtained by interviewing people who are expert in the area in question. The interviewer, or knowledge engineer, organizes the information elicited from the experts into a collection of rules, typically of an “if-then” structure. Rules of this type are called production rules. The inference engine enables the expert system to draw deductions from the rules in the KB. For example, if the KB contains the production rules “if x, then y” and “if y, then z,” the inference engine is able to deduce “if x, then z.” The expert system might then query its user, “Is x true in the situation that we are considering?” If the answer is affirmative, the system will proceed to infer z.

Some expert systems use fuzzy logic. In standard logic there are only two truth values, true and false. This absolute precision makes vague attributes or situations difficult to characterize. (When, precisely, does a thinning head of hair become a bald head?) Often the rules that human experts use contain vague expressions, and so it is useful for an expert system’s inference engine to employ fuzzy logic.

DENDRAL
In 1965 the AI researcher Edward Feigenbaum and the geneticist Joshua Lederberg, both of Stanford University, began work on Heuristic DENDRAL (later shortened to DENDRAL), a chemical-analysis expert system. The substance to be analyzed might, for example, be a complicated compound of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. Starting from spectrographic data obtained from the substance, DENDRAL would hypothesize the substance’s molecular structure. DENDRAL’s performance rivaled that of chemists expert at this task, and the program was used in industry and in academia.

MYCIN
Work on MYCIN, an expert system for treating blood infections, began at Stanford University in 1972. MYCIN would attempt to diagnose patients based on reported symptoms and medical test results. The program could request further information concerning the patient, as well as suggest additional laboratory tests, to arrive at a probable diagnosis, after which it would recommend a course of treatment. If requested, MYCIN would explain the reasoning that led to its diagnosis and recommendation. Using about 500 production rules, MYCIN operated at roughly the same level of competence as human specialists in blood infections and rather better than general practitioners.

Nevertheless, expert systems have no common sense or understanding of the limits of their expertise. For instance, if MYCIN were told that a patient who had received a gunshot wound was bleeding to death, the program would attempt to diagnose a bacterial cause for the patient’s symptoms. Expert systems can also act on absurd clerical errors, such as prescribing an obviously incorrect dosage of a drug for a patient whose weight and age data were accidentally transposed.

The CYC project
CYC is a large experiment in symbolic AI. The project began in 1984 under the auspices of the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a consortium of computer, semiconductor, and electronics manufacturers. In 1995 Douglas Lenat, the CYC project director, spun off the project as Cycorp, Inc., based in Austin, Texas. The most ambitious goal of Cycorp was to build a KB containing a significant percentage of the commonsense knowledge of a human being. Millions of commonsense assertions, or rules, were coded into CYC. The expectation was that this “critical mass” would allow the system itself to extract further rules directly from ordinary prose and eventually serve as the foundation for future generations of expert systems.

With only a fraction of its commonsense KB compiled, CYC could draw inferences that would defeat simpler systems. For example, CYC could infer, “Garcia is wet,” from the statement, “Garcia is finishing a marathon run,” by employing its rules that running a marathon entails high exertion, that people sweat at high levels of exertion, and that when something sweats it is wet. Among the outstanding remaining problems are issues in searching and problem solving—for example, how to search the KB automatically for information that is relevant to a given problem. AI researchers call the problem of updating, searching, and otherwise manipulating a large structure of symbols in realistic amounts of time the frame problem. Some critics of symbolic AI believe that the frame problem is largely unsolvable and so maintain that the symbolic approach will never yield genuinely intelligent systems. It is possible that CYC, for example, will succumb to the frame problem long before the system achieves human levels of knowledge.

Connectionism
Connectionism, or neuronlike computing, developed out of attempts to understand how the human brain works at the neural level and, in particular, how people learn and remember. In 1943 the neurophysiologist Warren McCulloch of the University of Illinois and the mathematician Walter Pitts of the University of Chicago published an influential treatise on neural nets and automatons, according to which each neuron in the brain is a simple digital processor and the brain as a whole is a form of computing machine. As McCulloch put it subsequently, “What we thought we were doing (and I think we succeeded fairly well) was treating the brain as a Turing machine.”

Creating an artificial neural network
It was not until 1954, however, that Belmont Farley and Wesley Clark of MIT succeeded in running the first artificial neural network—albeit limited by computer memory to no more than 128 neurons. They were able to train their networks to recognize simple patterns. In addition, they discovered that the random destruction of up to 10 percent of the neurons in a trained network did not affect the network’s performance—a feature that is reminiscent of the brain’s ability to tolerate limited damage inflicted by surgery, accident, or disease.

section of an artificial neural network
section of an artificial neural network
The simple neural network depicted in the figure illustrates the central ideas of connectionism. Four of the network’s five neurons are for input, and the fifth—to which each of the others is connected—is for output. Each of the neurons is either firing (1) or not firing (0). Each connection leading to N, the output neuron, has a “weight.” What is called the total weighted input into N is calculated by adding up the weights of all the connections leading to N from neurons that are firing. For example, suppose that only two of the input neurons, X and Y, are firing. Since the weight of the connection from X to N is 1.5 and the weight of the connection from Y to N is 2, it follows that the total weighted input to N is 3.5. As shown in the figure, N has a firing threshold of 4. That is to say, if N’s total weighted input equals or exceeds 4, then N fires; otherwise, N does not fire. So, for example, N does not fire if the only input neurons to fire are X and Y, but N does fire if X, Y, and Z all fire.

Training the network involves two steps. First, the external agent inputs a pattern and observes the behaviour of N. Second, the agent adjusts the connection weights in accordance with the rules:

If the actual output is 0 and the desired output is 1, increase by a small fixed amount the weight of each connection leading to N from neurons that are firing (thus making it more likely that N will fire the next time the network is given the same pattern);
If the actual output is 1 and the desired output is 0, decrease by that same small amount the weight of each connection leading to the output neuron from neurons that are firing (thus making it less likely that the output neuron will fire the next time the network is given that pattern as input).
The external agent—actually a computer program—goes through this two-step procedure with each pattern in a training sample, which is then repeated a number of times. During these many repetitions, a pattern of connection weights is forged that enables the network to respond correctly to each pattern. The striking thing is that the learning process is entirely mechanical and requires no human intervention or adjustment. The connection weights are increased or decreased automatically by a constant amount, and exactly the same learning procedure applies to different tasks.

Perceptrons
In 1957 Frank Rosenblatt of the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, began investigating artificial neural networks that he called perceptrons. He made major contributions to the field of AI, both through experimental investigations of the properties of neural networks (using computer simulations) and through detailed mathematical analysis. Rosenblatt was a charismatic communicator, and there were soon many research groups in the United States studying perceptrons. Rosenblatt and his followers called their approach connectionist to emphasize the importance in learning of the creation and modification of connections between neurons. Modern researchers have adopted this term.

One of Rosenblatt’s contributions was to generalize the training procedure that Farley and Clark had applied to only two-layer networks so that the procedure could be applied to multilayer networks. Rosenblatt used the phrase “back-propagating error correction” to describe his method. The method, with substantial improvements and extensions by numerous scientists, and the term back-propagation are now in everyday use in connectionism.

Conjugating verbs
In one famous connectionist experiment conducted at the University of California at San Diego (published in 1986), David Rumelhart and James McClelland trained a network of 920 artificial neurons, arranged in two layers of 460 neurons, to form the past tenses of English verbs. Root forms of verbs—such as come, look, and sleep—were presented to one layer of neurons, the input layer. A supervisory computer program observed the difference between the actual response at the layer of output neurons and the desired response—came, say—and then mechanically adjusted the connections throughout the network in accordance with the procedure described above to give the network a slight push in the direction of the correct response. About 400 different verbs were presented one by one to the network, and the connections were adjusted after each presentation. This whole procedure was repeated about 200 times using the same verbs, after which the network could correctly form the past tense of many unfamiliar verbs as well as of the original verbs. For example, when presented for the first time with guard, the network responded guarded; with weep, wept; with cling, clung; and with drip, dripped (complete with double p). This is a striking example of learning involving generalization. (Sometimes, though, the peculiarities of English were too much for the network, and it formed squawked from squat, shipped from shape, and membled from mail.)

Another name for connectionism is parallel distributed processing, which emphasizes two important features. First, a large number of relatively simple processors—the neurons—operate in parallel. Second, neural networks store information in a distributed fashion, with each individual connection participating in the storage of many different items of information. The know-how that enabled the past-tense network to form wept from weep, for example, was not stored in one specific location in the network but was spread throughout the entire pattern of connection weights that was forged during training. The human brain also appears to store information in a distributed fashion, and connectionist research is contributing to attempts to understand how it does so.

Other neural networks
Other work on neuronlike computing includes the following:

Visual perception. Networks can recognize faces and other objects from visual data. A neural network designed by John Hummel and Irving Biederman at the University of Minnesota can identify about 10 objects from simple line drawings. The network is able to recognize the objects—which include a mug and a frying pan—even when they are drawn from different angles. Networks investigated by Tomaso Poggio of MIT are able to recognize bent-wire shapes drawn from different angles, faces photographed from different angles and showing different expressions, and objects from cartoon drawings with gray-scale shading indicating depth and orientation.
Language processing. Neural networks are able to convert handwritten and typewritten material to electronic text. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service has commissioned a neuronlike system that will automatically read tax returns and correspondence. Neural networks also convert speech to printed text and printed text to speech.
Financial analysis. Neural networks are being used increasingly for loan risk assessment, real estate valuation, bankruptcy prediction, share price prediction, and other business applications.
Medicine. Medical applications include detecting lung nodules and heart arrhythmias and predicting adverse drug reactions.
Telecommunications. Telecommunications applications of neural networks include control of telephone switching networks and echo cancellation in modems and on satellite links.
Nouvelle AI
New foundations
The approach now known as nouvelle AI was pioneered at the MIT AI Laboratory by the Australian Rodney Brooks during the latter half of the 1980s. Nouvelle AI distances itself from strong AI, with its emphasis on human-level performance, in favour of the relatively modest aim of insect-level performance. At a very fundamental level, nouvelle AI rejects symbolic AI’s reliance upon constructing internal models of reality, such as those described in the section Microworld programs. Practitioners of nouvelle AI assert that true intelligence involves the ability to function in a real-world environment.

A central idea of nouvelle AI is that intelligence, as expressed by complex behaviour, “emerges” from the interaction of a few simple behaviours. For example, a robot whose simple behaviours include collision avoidance and motion toward a moving object will appear to stalk the object, pausing whenever it gets too close.

Herbert the robot
Herbert the robot
three stages of mobile robot development for the Mars Rover Research Project
three stages of mobile robot development for the Mars Rover Research Project
Genghis the robot
Genghis the robot
Attila the robot
Attila the robot
Pebbles the robot
Pebbles the robot
One famous example of nouvelle AI is Brooks’s robot Herbert (named after Herbert Simon), whose environment is the busy offices of the MIT AI Laboratory. Herbert searches desks and tables for empty soda cans, which it picks up and carries away. The robot’s seemingly goal-directed behaviour emerges from the interaction of about 15 simple behaviours. More recently, Brooks has constructed prototypes of mobile robots for exploring the surface of Mars. (See the photographs and an interview with Rodney Brooks.)

Nouvelle AI sidesteps the frame problem discussed in the section The CYC project. Nouvelle systems do not contain a complicated symbolic model of their environment. Instead, information is left “out in the world” until such time as the system needs it. A nouvelle system refers continuously to its sensors rather than to an internal model of the world: it “reads off” the external world whatever information it needs at precisely the time it needs it. (As Brooks insisted, the world is its own best model—always exactly up-to-date and complete in every detail.)

The situated approach
Traditional AI has by and large attempted to build disembodied intelligences whose only interaction with the world has been indirect (CYC, for example). Nouvelle AI, on the other hand, attempts to build embodied intelligences situated in the real world—a method that has come to be known as the situated approach. Brooks quoted approvingly from the brief sketches that Turing gave in 1948 and 1950 of the situated approach. By equipping a machine “with the best sense organs that money can buy,” Turing wrote, the machine might be taught “to understand and speak English” by a process that would “follow the normal teaching of a child.” Turing contrasted this with the approach to AI that focuses on abstract activities, such as the playing of chess. He advocated that both approaches be pursued, but until recently little attention has been paid to the situated approach.

The situated approach was also anticipated in the writings of the philosopher Bert Dreyfus of the University of California at Berkeley. Beginning in the early 1960s, Dreyfus opposed the physical symbol system hypothesis, arguing that intelligent behaviour cannot be completely captured by symbolic descriptions. As an alternative, Dreyfus advocated a view of intelligence that stressed the need for a body that could move about, interacting directly with tangible physical objects. Once reviled by advocates of AI, Dreyfus is now regarded as a prophet of the situated approach.

Critics of nouvelle AI point out the failure to produce a system exhibiting anything like the complexity of behaviour found in real insects. Suggestions by researchers that their nouvelle systems may soon be conscious and possess language seem entirely premature.

Is strong AI possible?
The ongoing success of applied AI and of cognitive simulation, as described in the preceding sections of this article, seems assured. However, strong AI—that is, artificial intelligence that aims to duplicate human intellectual abilities—remains controversial. Exaggerated claims of success, in professional journals as well as the popular press, have damaged its reputation. At the present time even an embodied system displaying the overall intelligence of a cockroach is proving elusive, let alone a system that can rival a human being. The difficulty of scaling up AI’s modest achievements cannot be overstated. Five decades of research in symbolic AI have failed to produce any firm evidence that a symbol system can manifest human levels of general intelligence; connectionists are unable to model the nervous systems of even the simplest invertebrates; and critics of nouvelle AI regard as simply mystical the view that high-level behaviours involving language understanding, planning, and reasoning will somehow emerge from the interaction of basic behaviours such as obstacle avoidance, gaze control, and object manipulation.

However, this lack of substantial progress may simply be testimony to the difficulty of strong AI, not to its impossibility. Let us turn to the very idea of strong artificial intelligence. Can a computer possibly think? Noam Chomsky suggests that debating this question is pointless, for it is an essentially arbitrary decision whether to extend common usage of the word think to include machines. There is, Chomsky claims, no factual question as to whether any such decision is right or wrong—just as there is no question as to whether our decision to say that airplanes fly is right, or our decision not to say that ships swim is wrong. However, this seems to oversimplify matters. The important question is, Could it ever be appropriate to say that computers think, and, if so, what conditions must a computer satisfy in order to be so described?

Some authors offer the Turing test as a definition of intelligence. However, Turing himself pointed out that a computer that ought to be described as intelligent might nevertheless fail his test if it were incapable of successfully imitating a human being. For example, why should an intelligent robot designed to oversee mining on the Moon necessarily be able to pass itself off in conversation as a human being? If an intelligent entity can fail the test, then the test cannot function as a definition of intelligence. It is even questionable whether passing the test would actually show that a computer is intelligent, as the information theorist Claude Shannon and the AI pioneer John McCarthy pointed out in 1956. Shannon and McCarthy argued that it is possible, in principle, to design a machine containing a complete set of canned responses to all the questions that an interrogator could possibly ask during the fixed time span of the test. Like Parry, this machine would produce answers to the interviewer’s questions by looking up appropriate responses in a giant table. This objection seems to show that in principle a system with no intelligence at all could pass the Turing test.

In fact, AI has no real definition of intelligence to offer, not even in the subhuman case. Rats are intelligent, but what exactly must an artificial intelligence achieve before researchers can claim this level of success? In the absence of a reasonably precise criterion for when an artificial system counts as intelligent, there is no objective way of telling whether an AI research program has succeeded or failed. One result of AI’s failure to produce a satisfactory criterion of intelligence is that, whenever researchers achieve one of AI’s goals—for example, a program that can summarize newspaper articles or beat the world chess champion—critics are able to say “That’s not intelligence!” Marvin Minsky’s response to the problem of defining intelligence is to maintain—like Turing before him—that intelligence is simply our name for any problem-solving mental process that we do not yet understand. Minsky likens intelligence to the concept “unexplored regions of Africa”: it disappears as soon as we discover it.